What Job Application Data Reveal About Accounting Rookies’ Research Potential 
 
 
 
 
Bin Ke1 and Zhen Long2 
 
 
 
March 20, 2026 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Most organizations adopt a structured recruitment funnel that begins with résumé -based screening. 
Although systematic, this initial screening is time-consuming and error-prone due to limited information 
and potential human biases. Using the accounting rookie job market as our empirical setting, we 
examine whether the limited information available at the initial stage can support the development of 
an effective machine learning algorithm for identifying candidates with stronger research potential. We 
find that each of the three available inputs—résumés, the quality of prior educational institutions , PhD 
advisors, and coauthors, and the job market paper —independently predicts subsequent research 
productivity. When combined, these inputs generate a screening algorithm that performs two to four 
times better than random guesses. We further document that the algorithm exhibits lower bias relative 
to human recruiters. Taken together, our findings show  the promise of algorithmic screening in 
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of initial-stage applicant screening.  
JEL: C53; M12; M41; M51 
Keywords: rookie candidates; resume; research productivity; machine learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We thank K. Ramesh, Shiva Sivaramakrishnan, Lijun Xia, Sara Toynbee, Qi Zhang,  Haifeng You, Yong Yu, 
workshop participants at the NUS , Rice University, University of Macau, Tsinghua University, UT -Austin, 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Zhejiang University, University of Houston, 
IDEI AI for Business Conference at HKU , for helpful comments.  Bin Ke acknowledges financial support from 
the National University of Singapore and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 72442013). 
This article is written with the assistance of ChatGPT. 
 
1 NUS Business School, National University of Singapore, Mochtar Riady Building, BIZ 1, #07- 30, 15 Kent 
 Ridge Drive, Singapore 119245. Tel: +65 66013133. Fax: +65 67736493. Email: bizk@nus.edu.sg.  
2 School of Accountancy, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law. Email: longzhen@zuel.edu.cn.1 
 
1. Introduction 
Employee selection is a fundamental component of management control systems. 1  Most 
organizations follow a structured recruitment funnel , which typically includes multiple stages: initial 
screening by human recruiters based on limited information, typically only standardized résumés  
(without direct interaction), followed by several rounds of interviews to collect additional information 
to evaluate the shortlisted candidates’ hard and soft skills. While systematic, the standard recruitment 
funnel is often time-consuming, costly, and prone to suboptimal outcomes (Boushey and Glynn 2012). 
One significant hurdle is the large volume of applicants, which pressures recruiters to make quick, 
superficial decisions during the initial screening phase (Li, Raymond, and Bergman 2026; Lerner and 
Bergman 2024). This rushed evaluation often results in overlooking qualified candidates, an error that 
subsequent stages of the recruitment process cannot  rectify effectively (Lerner and Bergman 2024) . 
This study proposes and validates a novel personnel selection method designed to enhance both the 
efficiency and effectiveness of applicant screening in the initial stage of the recruitment funnel. 
 Traditional employee recruitment processes largely depend on the judgment of human 
recruiters, which introduces two key limitations (Hoffman, Kahn, and Li 2018; Kahneman, Sibony, and 
Sunstein 2021). First, recruiters are prone to heuristic and cognitive biases, leading to inconsistent 
evaluations of job applicants’ fit and performance potential. Lerner and Bergman (2024) observe that 
recruiters perform only marginally better than random chance in evaluating resumes during the initial 
 
1 Merchant and Van der Stede (2017) classify management control systems into action, results, and personnel and 
cultural controls. Employee selection is a critical part of personnel control.  2 
 
stage of employee selection, with significant disagreement on what constitutes a strong candidate. 
Second, agency conflicts, such as personal preferences or nepotism, can distort judgments. These 
deficiencies frequently result in mismatches between hired employees and optimal candid ates, 
ultimately hampering firm performance. 
 To address the inherent limitations of human recruiters, we leverage machine learning 
techniques (Mullainathan 2025). While machine learning's superior information-processing capabilities 
relative to human judgment are well established (e.g., Ding, Lev, Peng, Sun, and Vasarhelyi 2020; Liu 
2022), it remains an open question whether machine learning–based selection methods are effective 
when constrained by the limited information available at the initial screening stage. 
We assess the feasibility of our proposed selection method using data from the accounting 
rookie faculty job market. The academic hiring context allows us to address a key obstacle in 
implementing and validating our predictive selection models: the lack of outcome data for non- hired 
applicants. In typical recruitment settings, post-hire outcomes are observed only for selected candidates, 
introducing selection bias and limiting the generalizability of model performance —particularly in 
contexts with low hirin g rates. In contrast, we observe subsequent publication outcomes for all job 
market candidates, regardless of placement. This feature enables us to train a model on the full set of 
applicants, reducing selection bias and enhancing predictive validity. In addition, our research question 
is equally relevant to academic institutions, as they face selection challenges analogous to those faced 
by corporate recruiters. 3 
 
Our sample comprises complete application records for 569 candidates — fewer than 150 per 
year—who participated in the Miami rookie market between 2015 and 2018. The sample ends in 2018 
to allow for a 5-year window for measuring post-graduation research performance. Although recruiters 
assess candidates on multiple dimensions, we focus on research potential because it is both critical to 
faculty hiring decisions and inherently difficult to measure. Data on other dimensions, such as teaching 
ability, are unavailable at the initial recruitment stage and hence cannot be analyzed in this study. We 
expect that recruiters evaluate additional dimensions in subsequent stages of the hiring process, when 
richer information can be obtained through direct interactions with shortlisted candidates. 
We proxy for research potential using the number of publications in 11 leading journals 
spanning accounting, finance, and management science—outlets widely regarded as central to the 
accounting discipline. We track publications over a five- year window begi nning on January 1 of the 
candidate’s graduation year, reflecting the typical timing of the academic job market, which commences 
in December. To simplify the prediction task, we convert the continuous publication count into a binary 
outcome, defined using thresholds at the 5th, 10th, 20th, and 30th percentiles for each year. 
To evaluate the predictive value of different types of application data, we construct a series of 
machine learning models for predicting research productivity using three primary data sets. The first 
set (denoted as set A) consists of information extracted directly from candidates’ resumes. The second 
set (denoted as set B) includes metrics related to the quality of journals in which the candidates have 
published, as well as the reputations of their educational institutions, dissertation advisors, and 4 
 
coauthors. While the variables in the second set are not directly included in the candidates’ application 
materials, they are readily obtainable from publicly available sources.  
Reading job market papers is one of the most time-consuming tasks for faculty recruiters. We 
therefore examine whether machine learning can extract useful information from job market papers, 
which form our third dataset (Set C). To represent paper content, we use OpenAI’s large language 
model, text-embedding-3-large. Given the model’s token limit, we restrict the embedded text to each 
paper’s title, abstract, and introduction.2 
To address potential selection bias resulting from the endogenous matches between job 
candidates and academic institutions, we classify institutions as research -intensive or non -research-
intensive and implement inverse probability weighting (IPW), following Swaminathan and Joachims 
(2015) and Schnabel et al. (2016). IPW reweights observations by the estimated probability of a given 
candidate–institution type match, thereby mitigating bias arising from non-random matching. 
 We begin by evaluating the predictive value of each data source—A, B, and C —when used 
independently in our machine learning models. We use a cumulative rolling window approach, training 
models on at least two years of data , and accordingly, the testing samples cover the 2017 and 2018 
batches. Given the small training sample sizes, we employ the  logit model, which outperforms more 
advanced methods such as Random Forest in our study.   
 
2 Accounting rookie candidates may sometimes include the title and abstracts of their job market paper and other 
working papers within their resumes. However, the resume data in Set A explicitly excludes any information 
related to such abstract information. As a result, there is no overlap between Sets A and C in our analysis . 5 
 
For both test years, the research productivity model based on each data source significantly 
outperforms the unconditional mean benchmark for each dependent variable, which represents random 
guessing. These results suggest that each data source contains useful information for predicting research 
productivity.  
Next, we evaluate the performance of a research productivity model that combines all three 
data sources into a single specification (Model ABC). As expected, Model ABC significantly 
outperforms the unconditional mean benchmark for each dependent variable. Moreover, its 
performance is generally comparable to, and in many cases exceeds, that of models based on a single 
data source. 
An important question is whether our most comprehensive research productivity specification, 
Model ABC, outperforms human recruiters when research productivity is used as the sole evaluation 
criterion. Institutions with higher rankings tend to attract stronger candidates. Moreover, rookie 
candidates selected by top-ranked institutions often benefit from these institutions’ superior resources, 
which can further enhance their productivity. Consequently, if the profession efficiently matches 
candidate quality to institutional quality, the collective outcomes of human recruiters should, in theory, 
outperform the predictions of our machine learning model.
3 
To test this prediction, we rank the universities based on U.S. News & World Report’s top 50 
graduate business schools, since  most accounting candidates in our sample graduated from North 
American institutions. Institutions not on this list are ranked using the QS World University Ranking, 
 
3  Since we do not have access to the list of applicants for individual institutions, we cannot evaluate the 
performance of our best machine learning model at the individual institution level.  6 
 
while those absent from both rankings are placed at the bottom. To reduce the potential measurement 
error of the university rankings, we aggregate universities included in the U.S. News and QS World 
University rankings into deciles for each year. Institutions not appearing on either list are placed in a 
separate category, ranked at the bottom.  
To evaluate the performance of human recruiters across the accounting profession, we train a 
machine learning model  (also a logit model) that uses the decile ranking of the initial placement 
institution as the sole input (denoted as the Human Selection Model ). The results indicate that the 
Human Selection Model outperforms random guessing for approximately 75% of the specifications in 
the two combined test years. This evidence is consistent with the view that human recruiters possess 
information or judgment that improves selection outcomes relative to random assignment.   However, 
the performance of Model ABC exceeds that of the Human Selection Model in 75% of the models in 
the two combined test years. Notably, as the prediction task becomes more demanding —specifi cally, 
when applying the 5% or 10% cutoff—Model ABC outperforms the Human Selection Model, with an 
average improvement of 92%. These results suggest that human recruiters may have substantially 
misjudged candidates’ research potential, or alternatively, that they place weight on non- research 
productivity factors that justify forgoing the observed large performance gains. 
The performance differences between Model ABC  and the Human Selection Model  suggest 
that human recruiters weigh  the data sources —A, B, and C —differently than our machine learning 
models do. To better understand these weighting differences, we compare Model ABC, which predicts 
research productivity, with a new model that uses the same predictors (ABC) but instead predicts a job 7 
 
candidate’s initial job placement (the Initial Placement Model). As with Model ABC, we convert the 
placement rankings into dichotomous variables using the same cutoffs.   
We employ Shapley values (SHAP)  to quantify the contribution of individual predictors to  
prediction performance. Given the large number of predictors, we focus on the top ten predictors based 
on their SHAP values for each model. We find significant differences in both the ranking and the sign 
of SHAP values between Model ABC and the Initial Placement Model, suggesting that human recruiters 
weigh the same information sources differently from Model ABC. 
Our final analysis examines whether Model ABC exhibits greater biases than human recruiters 
against specific candidate groups. We compare the predicted probabilities from Model ABC and the 
predicted probabilities from the Initial Placement Model across two broad categories  of candidate 
attributes: (i) demographic characteristics such as gender and ethnicity (Asian background, European 
background), and (ii) institution characteristics (PhD program ranking and productivity of dissertation 
advisors). The results provide evidence consistent with greater bias in recruiters’ selection decisions. 
Specifically, recruiters exhibit a preference for candidates with a European background, those from the 
top 10 PhD programs, and those advised by highly productive dissertation supervisors. 
 The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews the prior literature and 
outlines our contributions. Section 3 details our research design and methodology. Section 4 presents 
empirical results and related sensitivity checks. Section 5 leverages our best predictive model to analyze 
the extent of bias reflected in hiring outcome s. Finally, Section 6 concludes with a summary of the 
findings and implications. 8 
 
2. Prior literature and contributions  
This study contributes to multiple streams of literature across different academic fields.  First, 
we contribute to the literature on managerial accounting and human resource management by 
addressing a central challenge in employee selection: assessing a candidate’s performance potential 
based on limited information available at the initial stage of the recruitment process.  While most 
existing studies in accounting and management focus on causal inference questions —such as how to 
motivate employees through contract design—there is relatively little research on employee selection  
methods, which are inherently prediction problems .
4 Although prior research has acknowledged the 
importance of measuring employee performance potential in human capital management  (e.g., Deller 
2023; Grabner, Künneke, and Moers 2025) , few have directly developed predictive methods for 
measuring human capital performance potential. To the best of our knowledge, Chen and Ke (2026) are 
among the few studies in the accounting and management literature that employ machine- learning 
models to assess human capital potential . Chen and Ke (2026) demonstrate the predictive value of 
resumes in initial applicant screening , but limit their focus to entry -level positions in a financial 
institution, which require relatively low levels of employee discretion. This raises an important 
question: can resumes alone effectively predict job performance for positions requiring significant 
discretion? 
 
4 Managerial accounting research (Manthei, Sliwka, and Vogelsang 2023)  emphasizes two fundamental roles of 
management control systems —decision -facilitating and decision -influencing—which closely correspond to the 
concepts of prediction and causal inference, respectively. 9 
 
We address this question by examining rookie faculty candidates in accounting, whose primary 
responsibility is to conduct high-quality research— a task requiring substantial creativity and discretion. 
Using data on candidates’ top post-graduation journal publications, we provide evidence that the limited 
resume information available during initial applicant screening is highly valuable for predicting future 
research productivity. Moreover, our machine learning models , trained on resume data,  significantly 
outperform human recruiters’ selection outcomes. 
By integrating the findings from Chen and Ke (2026) and our study, which analyze two distinct 
organizational contexts and job types, our research underscores the predictive power of resumes in 
forecasting future job performance. However, our findings also highlight that such information is 
underutilized in current human- centered recruitment processes. We provide a counterfactual analysis 
indicating that, if the top 10 institutions were to adopt our most comprehensive model in applicant 
screening, the concentration of the most productive researchers among these institutions would increase 
by more than 40%.  
Our study responds directly to Kaplan (1998) , who advocates for more practice -relevant 
research through the development of new management tools within organizations, and to Labro (2025), 
who highlights the scarcity of managerial accounting research offering practical relevance and 
actionable insights, while calling for greater attention to predictive analytics (see also Casas- Arce, 
Cheng, Grabner, and Modell 2022). Our study is important because advanced people analytics tools of 
the type we develop remain underexplored and largely unimplemented in recruitment. 10 
 
Second, our study contributes to the economics literature on talent selection within academic 
settings. This literature primarily focuses on causal inference, identifying factors that explain variation 
in academic researchers' research productivity. Key determinants of research productivity highlighted 
in prior studies include research funding (Gulbrandsen and Smeby 2005) , the rank of the candidate ’s 
Ph.D. program  (Conley and Önder 2014) , advisor ’s gender  (Hussey, Murray, and Stock 2022) , 
parenthood (Krapf, Ursprung, and Zimmermann 2017), coauthorship network (Ductor 2015; Defazio, 
Lockett, and Wright 2009; Yadav, McHale, and O’Neill 2023; Hilmer and Hilmer 2012; Ductor and 
Visser 2022), and initial job placement (Oyer 2006). 
As expected, most studies in this literature focus on causal inference questions, typically 
examining associations between academic productivity and one or two specific factors. However, 
relatively few studies have explored out -of-sample prediction of academic productivity. For instance, 
Hilmer and Hilmer (2012) collected data on over 3,000 rookie job candidates listed in the Journal of 
Economic Literature who earned their economics Ph.D. between 1990 and 1994. Using 1994 as a test 
year, they predicted publication counts based on a limited set of publicly available predictors, given no 
direct access to candidates’ resumes, including six Ph.D. program-tier dummies, advisor prominence, 
whether the candidate worked with a prominent advisor, and whether they published during graduate 
school. Similarly, Ductor et al. (2014) constructed a coauthorship network using articles published in 
EconLit from 1970 to 1999 to investigate how network- related variables predict academic output. 
Ductor et al. (2014) did not differentiate between rookie and non -rookie scholars, nor did it consider 
the role of limited resume information at initial applicant screening. 11 
 
Our study contributes to this emerging literature on prediction by developing a machine 
learning model tailored to the initial screening of rookie job candidates in accounting—a field closely 
related to, but distinct from, economics. Importantly, we are the first to evaluate the predictive value of 
limited job application materials  in assessing future research productivity. In addition, our list of 
predictors is more comprehensive than those used in prior studies, as we leverage the full suite of 
application information available to human recruiters. This allows us to provide a richer and more 
realistic assessment of the factors influencing research productivity, advancing the predictive 
capabilities in academic talent selection. 
Third, our study contributes to the growing field of advanced people analytics on person- job 
fit, a domain primarily driven by researchers in computer engineering.5  Much of the existing literature 
in this area focuses on methodological advancements and proof -of-concept studies, rather than 
developing user-centered machine learning algorithms grounded in real-world data that can outperform 
current management practices (Meier and Laumer 2022). A common limitation in this field is the lack 
of access to actual job performance data, leading many studies to rely on proxy measures of person-job 
fit, such as similarity or distance scores between candidates ’ credentials and job descriptions ( e.g., 
Malinowski et al., 2006; Kmail et al., 2015; Zaroor et al., 2017; Manad et al., 2018; Bello et al., 2020; 
Lee and Ahn, 2020; Zhu et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2018; Qin et al., 2020) . These studies assume that 
higher similarity between a candidate’s CV and a job description indicates a better fit . Unfortunately, 
prior studies have not validated this assumption using subsequent job performance data. 
 
5 This literature is voluminous, and it is beyond the scope of this study to provide a thorough review of this 
literature. Interested readers can read Strohmeier (2022) and Qin et al. (2024) for comprehensive reviews. 12 
 
Another stream of research in people analytics involves building prediction models of 
“hirability,” using scores from human raters as ground truth. However, even experienced HR 
professionals often disagree on the most important factors in candidate evaluation (Harris 2018; Lerner 
and Bergman 2024) . Moreover, these studies are often based on hypothetical scenarios that  may not 
accurately reflect the complexities of real -world hiring decisions. While the management field has 
begun exploring algorithm-based employee selection, much of the focus remains on the measurement 
of theoretical constructs rather than prediction (Campion et al. 2024; Sajjadiani, Sojourner, Kammeyer-
Mueller, and Mykerezi 2019; Chakraborty, Chiong, Dover, and Sudhir 2024). 
Our study differs fundamentally from these existing approaches in several key ways. First, we 
observe both hiring outcomes and post -hiring performance for all applicants, enabling us to develop 
more reliable predictive models. This represents a significant advantage over Chen and Ke (2026), who 
observe post-hiring performance only for applicants who are hired. Second, unlike many studies in the 
machine learning field that prioritize methodological innovations, we emphasize the critical importance 
of data engineering (e.g., resume data in our study) . Our approach aligns with Ng’s (2021) call for a 
data-centric approach  that prioritizes refining  input data (X) and labels (Y) over iterative model 
adjustments.  
Although our best machine learning model, Model ABC, demonstrates strong performance, we 
acknowledge that research productivity is not the sole factor considered by human recruiters. For 
example, cultural fit may play a significant role in recruitment decisions. Furthermore, many aspects of 
the recruitment process may not lend themselves to machine learning approaches. Accordingly, we view 13 
 
our machine learning models as tools to augment —not replace —human recruiters by improving the 
efficiency and quality of candidate screening at the initial stage of the recruitment process. Furthermore, 
by generating a quantitative estimate of research potential, our models offer an explicit quantitative 
benchmark that can inform trade- offs among candidate attributes (e.g., research versus teaching 
potential), thereby potentially enhancing the quality of overall recruitment decisions. 
3. Empirical Designs 
3.1. Data sources 
 The data for our study is drawn from multiple sources. To minimize data collection costs, we 
focus on rookie accounting job candidates who attended the Miami Rookie Camp. Given the need to 
evaluate each candidate’s post-graduation performance over a five-year period, our sample is restricted 
to rookie candidates from the years 2015 to 2018. For instance, a job candidate from 2015 would have 
submitted their job application to the Camp by December 31, 2015, and graduated by the summer of 
2016. For each candidate, we collect only their resume and job market paper, as the primary objective 
of this study is to evaluate the predictive value of these data sources for future research productivity. 
As shown in Table 1, our final sample comprises 569 rookie candidates: 152 from 2015, 141 from 2016, 
145 from 2017, and 131 from 2018. 
 To measure the academic quality of the universities represented in our sample, we gather 
historical business school rankings from U.S. News & World Report and the QS World University 
Rankings. The U.S. News rankings, published annually in the Best Graduate Schools report, list the top 
50 business schools in the United States. The QS World University Rankings, also published annually, 14 
 
offer a broader global perspective. Since the U.S. News rankings are limited to U.S. institutions and the 
majority of our candidates received their PhDs from North American universities, we use them  as the 
primary source. For institutions not included in the U.S. News list, we supplement with the QS rankings. 
Combining these sources, we compile a comprehensive list of 80 ranked universities. To ensure the 
integrity of our analysis and avoid look-ahead bias, we rely on rankings published in the year preceding 
each candidate’s application. This approach ensures that the rankings used for university reputation 
assessment accurately reflect the information available at the time candidates enter the job market. 
 To assess the reputation of a rookie candidate’s advisors and coauthors, we utilize the annual 
research productivity rankings from the BYU website 
(https://byuaccounting.net/rankings/main/studydescription.php). These rankings are based on 
publications in prominent accounting journals, including Accounting Horizons, Accounting, 
Organizations and Society, Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory, Behavioral Research in 
Accounting, Contemporary Accounting Research, Journal of Accounting and Economics, Journal of 
Accounting Research, Journal of Information Systems, Journal of Management Accounting Research, 
Journal of the American Taxation Association, Review of Accounting Studies, and The Accounting 
Review. 
 We also track the initial job placement of each rookie candidate using publicly available 
sources, such as online resumes, LinkedIn profiles, and SSRN. For candidates without publicly 
available placement information or who took positions outside academia (9 candidates in the 2015 15 
 
cohort, 8 in 2016, 12 in 2017, and 7 in 2018), we conservatively assume that they obtained positions at 
the lowest-ranked universities.  
 We measure research productivity using publication data from 11 top journals in accounting 
and finance: Journal of Accounting Research, Journal of Accounting and Economics, The Accounting 
Review, Contemporary Accounting Research, Review of Accounting Studi es, Accounting, 
Organizations and Society, Journal of Finance, Journal of Financial Economics, Review of Financial 
Studies, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, and Management Science. We include 
Management Science in this list because it is a leading journal in management science and a popular 
publication outlet for accounting researchers. 
 To identify publications authored by the rookie candidates in our sample, we collect all articles 
published in these journals from 2005 to 2023 and perform a name -matching process. To ensure 
comparability among PhD graduates from different years, we limit our analysis to papers published 
within five years after the candidates’ Miami Rookie Camp application year. The five -year horizon is 
chosen because our dataset includes publication records only through the end of 2023 at the start of this 
study. In addit ion, assistant professors in many universities are required to submit their tenure 
applications by the end of year five.  
3.2. Definition of research productivity  
 In our primary analyses, we measure a job candidate ’s research productivity by counting the 
number of publications in the 11 top accounting and finance journals over a five -year period starting 
from January 1 of a candidate’s graduation year . As a robustness check, we also define research 16 
 
productivity using a citation- weighted measure in Section 4.4, in which each publication is weighted 
by its Google citation count as of July 24, 2024, the date of our data collection. 
 To simplify the prediction task, we convert the continuous research productivity variable into 
a dichotomous variable, which equals 1 if a rookie candidate ’s research productivity ranks within the 
top K% of all rookie candidates graduating in the same year, and 0 otherwise. We evaluate K% values 
of 5%, 10%, 20%, and 30%. 6 We limit K%  to 30% because, as shown in footnote 6, the cutoff for 
K=30% is already the lowest positive integer  of 1. We denote these dichotomous variables as 
pub_top_5pct, pub_top_10pct, pub_top_20pct, and pub_top_30pct, corresponding to the respective 
cutoff levels (see Panel A of Appendix A for the detailed definitions). In addition to reducing forecasting 
complexity, using multiple dichotomous measures of research productivity better aligns with the needs 
of individual institutions, which are often more concerned with whether a candidate falls within the top 
K% of the applicant pool than with the exact number of top-tier journal publications. 
3.3. Definitions of model predictors 
We introduce the predictors of our research productivity prediction models in this section. See 
Appendix A for the detailed definitions of the predictors. 
3.3.1. Predictors extracted from the resume  
 Given the unstructured nature of resumes, we use GPT-4 (gpt-4-1106-preview) from OpenAI 
to extract structured variables. The specific prompts used for this process are presented in Table OA1 
 
6 The number of publications corresponding to the cutoffs of 5%, 10%, 20%, and 30% are as follows: for the test 
year 2017, the counts are 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively; for the test year 2018, the counts are 3, 2, 1, and 1, 
respectively. 17 
 
of the Online Appendix. We refer to the resulting set of predictors extracted directly from the resumes 
as Predictors A.  We assess the accuracy of GPT’s feature extraction from résumés in the Online 
Appendix, Table OA2. 
As noted in the Introduction, recruiters observe multiple signals during the hiring process . 
Compared with other sources, such as interview evaluations available only to shortlisted candidates, 
resume data offer a key advantage: the features we study are largely factual, difficult to manipulate, and 
often verifiable through third- party sources. Models based on resume data are therefore likely more 
robust to candidates’ behavioral responses. 
3.3.2. Predictors extracted from external public knowledge  
Many predictors extracted from resumes carry significant meaning that is  readily apparent to 
human recruiters due to their external knowledge , but may not be obvious to machines. Hence, w e 
develop the following set of Predictors B for each candidate. First, we measure the academic quality of 
candidates’ institutions using the U.S. News and QS rankings discussed earlier. Second, we assess 
publication and presentation quality using the top journals and accounting conferences noted in Table 
OA1. Third, using BYU accounting rankings, we measure the reputation of dissertation adviso rs and 
coauthors, as well as the strength of coauthor network. Finally, we infer nationality from languages 
reported on the resume. 
3.3.3. Predictors extracted from the job market paper  
Because the job market paper contains unstructured data, we use text embeddings to represent 
its content numerically. An embedding is a sequence of numbers that captures the semantic content of 18 
 
the text, such as concepts expressed in natural language. Given the study’s primary focus on evaluating 
the predictive value of resumes—and the token constraints of the large language model employed —we 
restrict the embedded content of each job market paper to its title, abstract, and introduction. For brevity, 
we continue to refer to this subset of text as the “job market paper” throughout the paper. A 
comprehensive exploration of full-text embeddings is left to future research.  
We use OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large model to generate paper embeddings. Although the 
model produces 3,072- dimensional vectors, we retain only the first 256 dimensions, which OpenAI 
reports still perform well relative to most alternatives. For texts long er than 8,191 tokens, we use 
overlapping sliding windows with a 100- token stride and average the resulting vectors  (Goodfellow, 
Bengio, and Courville 2016). For candidates without job market papers, we assign a 256- dimensional 
zero vector. We label these measures Predictors C. 
Given the limitations of the embedding techniques employed by current large language models, 
it is unlikely that embeddings will fully capture the informational content of the job market paper's title, 
abstract, and introduction. This constraint should be considered when interpreting the incremental value 
of job market papers in our subsequent analysis. 
3.4. Machine learning methods 
3.4.1. Model details 
Our primary objective is to leverage a job candidate’s resume and other publicly available data 
from year 𝑡𝑡 to predict their research productivity over the subsequent five years. Given the temporal 19 
 
nature of our machine learning approach, we adopt a cumulative time series framework, incorporating 
all available historical data on rookie job candidates to train the models. 
Due to the relatively small sample size in each year’s rookie job market, we require at least 2 
years of training data to ensure model robustness. Consequently, our analysis includes two test years: 
2017 and 2018. For the 2017 test year, we use training data from 2015 and 2016. Similarly, for the 2018 
test year, we train the model using data from 2015 to 2017. 
Prior accounting research often employs advanced machine learning methods for predictive 
tasks. However, in this study, we use standard logistic regression as our primary method due to the 
small training sample sizes. Untabulated results indicate that prediction performance using the balanced 
random forest method is consistently inferior to that of the logistic regression approach. 
To evaluate the predictive value of Predictors A, B, and C individually, we train three separate 
sets of predictive models, each using only one predictor type . Additionally, we assess the predictive 
value of combining all three predictor types (denoted as Model ABC).  
There are two possible approaches for training models that combine predictors A, B, and C.  
The most common method, widely used in prior studies, involves combining all predictors into a single 
model for training, known as the early- fusion approach. Alternatively, the late -fusion approach trains 
separate models for each predictor type and then combines their predictions to produce the final output.  
Each approach has distinct advantages and limitations, which depend on the task context, data 
characteristics, and modeling objectives (Pereira, Salazar, and Vergara 2023) . The early -fusion 
approach allows the model to access all available data upfront, potentially improving performance if 20 
 
the features are complementary. It also enables the model to capture dependencies between features 
across different data sources. However, early fusion may face challenges when predictors from different 
modalities have varying scales or distributions, and it is more susceptible to overfitting, particularly 
with limited training data. 
In contrast, the late -fusion approach offers greater flexibility by processing each data source 
independently, enabling a modular design that is easier to update. This approach is robust to missing 
data, as predictions can still be made using the remaining models when one data source is unavailable. 
Additionally, late fusion is more scalable, allowing new data sources or models to be incorporated 
without requiring retraining of the entire system. It is also less prone to overfitting  because individual 
models operate on smaller, independent feature sets.  
In this study, we implement a late -fusion ensemble approach that averages the predicted 
probabilities from individual models (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019) . Untabulated results 
indicate that the early-fusion specification yields inferior predictive performance. 
One empirical challenge to estimating our machine learning models is that the observed 
matches between job candidates and placement institutions are endogenously determined, raising 
concerns about potential selection biases. To address this, we follow Swaminathan and Joachims (2015) 
and Schnabel et al. (2016) by implementing an inverse probability weighting (IPW) procedure, which 
re-weights the training sample to approximate a hypothetical market in which, conditional on observed 
resume characteristics, candidates are quasi -randomly assigned to different types of institutions. We 
provide a detailed explanation of this procedure in Appendix B. 21 
 
To mitigate the risk of overfitting in out -of-sample predictions, we partition the data into 
training, validation, and test sets, as illustrated in Figure 1. The test set is entirely disjoint from the 
combined training and validation sample. We randomly allocate 20% of the combined training and 
validation sample to the validation set, with the remaining 80% used for training. During model training, 
we specify a hyperparameter grid for 𝐶𝐶 (the inverse of the regularization strength) with values [0.001, 
0.01, 0.1, 1]. The optimal 𝐶𝐶 for each model is selected based on the highest ROC_AUC score on the 
validation set. All other hyperparameters are set to their default values. 7 Because the test set is used 
only once—after model training and validation are complete —we reduce the likelihood of overfitting. 8 
3.4.2. Performance evaluation metrics 
Because the dependent variables for research productivity are binary and highly skewed, we 
use NDCG@K (normalized discounted cumulative gain at K) as our primary evaluation metric, 
following Bao et al. (2020). We set K equal to the unconditional mean of the dependent variable in the 
test sample, which corresponds to the accuracy of a random benchmark. Because NDCG@K is not 
easily interpretable, we also report Precision@K and Recall@K. Under this choice of K, the two 
measures are identical, so we focus on Precision@K in the subsequent tables and discussion. Because 
NDCG@K is not directly comparable across models with different unconditional means of the 
 
7 Specifically, tolerance for stopping criteria: tol = 0.0001, maximum number of iterations to converge: max_iter 
= 100. More details of the default parameters of the logit model available  at https://scikit-
learn.org/1.5/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html .  
8 A common approach to assess overfitting risk is to compare predictive performance across in‑sample and out‑of-
sample data  (Roelofs 2019; Webster, Rabin, Simon, and Jurie 2019; Aburass and Rumman 2024) . For our best-
performing model, ABC, untabulated results show that NDCG@K for training -sample is not consistently higher 
than for out-of-sample predictions. This pattern provides no evidence of systematic overfitting. 22 
 
dependent variable, we also report LIFT, defined as Precision@K divided by that unconditional mean. 
Detailed definitions of all metrics are provided in Appendix C. 
4. Empirical results 
4.1. Descriptive statistics 
 Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics for all dependent variables and the variables included 
in Predictors A and B for the full sample spanning 2015–2018. We omit the predictors C as they are 
text embeddings and difficult to interpret. Panel A highlights that the dependent variables are highly 
unbalanced. For the four academic performance proxies, the mean values exceed the cut-off thresholds. 
This imbalance is largely due to ties in publication counts. For instance, while the top 30% of  rookies 
are defined as those who have published at least one paper in top journals, the mean value of 
pub_top_30pct is 0.41. 
4.2. Machine learning models for research productivity  
 Table 3 presents the performance of our machine learning models for the test years 2017 (Panel 
A) and 2018 (Panel B), respectively. Focusing on the test year 2017 in Panel A, w e can draw several 
insights from the results. First, the individual predictors A, B, and C demonstrate significant value in 
forecasting rookie candidates ’ future research productivity when used separately. The LIFT values 
indicate that, compared with the unconditional mean of the dependent variable, which serves as the  
benchmark, all  models outperform this baseline by a substantial margin. For example, using 
pub_top_5pct as the outcome variable, the Precision@K  metric for the model based on Predictor A 
(Model A) is 7.16 times the benchmark, 8.95 for Predictor B (Model B), and 3.58 for Predictor C (Model 23 
 
C). Second, the combined model incorporating all predictors (Model ABC) outperforms all individual 
models A, B, or C when evaluated using NDCG@K as the performance metric.  
 The conclusions for test year 2018 reported in Panel B are broadly similar, with a few minor 
differences. Using NDCG@K as the evaluation metric, Model ABC outperforms the best-performing 
individual model only when 𝐾𝐾=5%. In contrast, when Precision@K is used as the evaluation metric, 
Model ABC performs at least as well as the best-performing individual model across specifications. 
 Focusing on the most comprehensive model, Model ABC, we next evaluate its performance 
across different cutoffs. Focusing on the test year 2017, LIFT shows a consistent downward trend: 12.53 
for K=5%, 3.70 for K=10%, 2.26 for K=20%, and 1.61 for K=30%. We can draw similar inferences for 
the test year 2018. This monotonic decline highlights that the predictive advantage of Model ABC 
diminishes as K increases.  These findings reflect the nature of the prediction task: as the cutoff K 
increases, the task becomes inherently easier, reducing the relative benefit provided by the machine 
learning model. In other words, while Model ABC excels in scenarios where precise  predictions are 
more challenging (e.g., at smaller values of K), its incremental value decreases as the prediction 
requirements become less stringent.  
4.3. Comparing Model ABC with human recruiters  
 Up to this point, we have used the unconditional mean of the dependent variable, research 
productivity, as a benchmark for evaluating the performance of our prediction models. A natural 
question arises: can our best -performing model, ABC, outperform the se lection decisions of human 
recruiters? The answer to this question is not immediately clear due to several factors.  On one hand, 24 
 
human recruiters have access to a wealth of additional information beyond what is incorporated into 
Model ABC. This includes qualitative and “ soft” information derived from reference letters and 
interviews (both online and offline) in the later stages of the recruitment funnel, as well as other context-
specific insights that are challenging to quantify. These factors could give human decision- makers a 
distinct advantage over the algorithmic model. 
 On the other hand, human recruiters may face significant cognitive limitations that could hinder 
their ability to effectively process and synthesize vast amounts of information, especially at the initial 
stage of the recruitment funnel. Furthermore, recruiters' decision-making is not immune to biases and 
inefficiencies. Agency conflicts, stereotypes, and personal preferences may further distort recruitment 
decisions, leading to suboptimal candidate selection. These limitations suggest that, despite access to 
richer information at all stages of the recruitment funnel, human recruiters may not make better selection 
decisions than Model ABC. 
 Ideally, evaluating this question would compare the performance of Model ABC to the selection 
decisions made by recruiters at each individual institution. However, because data on the full applicant 
pool and placement decisions at the school level are unavailable , we conduct the analysis at the 
aggregate level—comparing Model ABC’s performance to the collective placement outcomes across 
all institutions. If the rookie job market functions efficiently—such that more productive candidates are 
matched with higher-ranked institutions, and research potential is the primary selection criterion— then 
institutional placement rankings should provide a stronger predictor of subsequent research productivity 
than Model ABC.   25 
 
4.3.1. The out-of-sample performance results of the Human Selection Model 
 To test this prediction, we construct a new machine-learning model for research productivity 
that uses the ranking of the initial job placement as its sole predictor (the Human Selection Model). This 
model serves as a proxy for the prediction performance of human recruiters in the accounting 
profession. For university rankings, we rely on the U.S. News & World Report rankings of the top 50 
U.S. business schools. For schools not covered by these rankings, we use the QS World University 
Rankings. Any remaining initial placements not included in either list are assigned the lowest rank. 
 This continuous ranking-based predictor has potential measurement errors. For instance, a 
school ranked No. 15 may not differ significantly from a school ranked No. 20. Additionally, candidates 
who receive offers from both No. 15 and No. 20 schools might choose the slightly lower-ranked No. 20 
school for personal reasons, such as spouse or family preferences. To address this concern, we convert 
the continuous ranking variable into deciles for schools included in the combined U.S. News and QS 
World University rankings. Schools excluded from both lists are assigned a separate, lowest -ranking 
decile. 9  
 Table 4 compares the performance of Model ABC with the Human Selection Model for the test 
years 2017 (Panel A) and 2018 (Panel B), respectively. Note that the performance metrics for Model 
ABC in Table 4 are reproduced from Table 3. As the findings for 2017 and 2018 are broadly similar, 
our discussion focuses on the results for the test year 2017. 
 
9 The inferences remain consistent regardless of whether the continuous or quintile ranking of initial job placement 
is applied in the Human Selection Model (results not tabulated).  26 
 
 The analysis of the test year 2017 reveals several key insights. First, the LIFT values indicate 
that the Precision@K values for the Human Selection Model are consistently higher than the 
unconditional mean across all K cutoff levels, indicating that human recruiters outperform the baseline. 
Second, and more importantly, Model ABC consistently outperforms the Human Selection Model at all 
K cutoff levels , as reflected in its higher NDCG@K values. For example, at K=5%, Model ABC 
achieves an NDCG@K that is 171 % higher than that of the Human Selection Model; at K=10%, the 
corresponding improvement is 108%. These results highlight the superior predictive accuracy of Model 
ABC. 
 However, the relative advantage of Model ABC over the Human Selection Model decreases as 
the cutoff K increases, with performance differences diminishing from K=5% to K=30%. This pattern 
suggests that as the prediction task becomes less challenging to human recruiters with larger cutoffs, 
the benefit of using Model ABC over the Human Selection Model diminishes. 
4.3.2. Performance of top-ranked schools 
 One potential critique of the analysis in Section 4.3.1 is that comparing Model ABC to human 
recruiters for the entire profession may not be entirely appropriate, as lower-tier schools may lack access 
to the full pool of rookie candidates. Additionally, top-tier schools may possess superior talent-selection 
capabilities and thus could beat Model ABC. To address this concern, we compare the performance of 
Model ABC with the performance of the Human Selection Model, focusing exclusively on top-ranked 
schools, which are assumed to have full access to the entire pool of rookie candidates. 27 
 
 For each cutoff K (e.g., 5%) in a given test year, we begin by counting the number of rookie 
candidates (denoted as 𝑁𝑁) with 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝_𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝐾𝐾𝑝𝑝𝐾𝐾𝑡𝑡 = 1. Next, we select N rookie candidates whose initial 
job placements are at the highest-ranked schools, based on the combined U.S. News & World Report 
and QS World University ranking lists. Using these candidates ’ subsequent top-journal publications, 
we calculate relevant performance metrics based on the ranking order of their placement institutions.  
 Table 5 presents the comparative performance of Model ABC and the Human Selection Model 
for top-ranked schools in test years 2017 (Panel A) and 2018 (Panel B), respectively. It is important to 
note that the performance metrics for Model ABC in Panel B are the same as those reported in Table 3. 
Assuming the top-ranked schools have access to the entire pool of rookie applicants, the unconditional 
means are the same as in Table 4. 
The broad inference in Table 5 is similar to that in Table 4. The analysis reveals little evidence 
that the selection performance of top- ranked schools exceeds that of Model ABC, especially at  lower 
K cutoffs . This suggests that the predictive advantage of Model ABC remains robust even when 
compared specifically to top-ranked institutions. 
4.3.3. Removing top-ranked schools 
 The analyses in Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 assume that research potential is the primary selection 
criterion for all schools. However, teaching could be a critical factor in faculty recruitment at institutions 
with top MBA programs. To address this potential concern, we exclude candidates placed in the top 10 
business schools (as ranked by U.S. News & World Report) and retrain the Human Selection Model on 28 
 
this restricted sample. This adjustment reduces the sample size by 23 candidates across the two test 
years. 
 Table 6 presents the test results for the revised Human Selection Model and the original Model 
ABC for the test years 2017 (Panel A) and 2018 (Panel B), respectively. As we have removed the 
candidates placed in the top 10 schools, the unconditional means are different from those in Table 4 
too. In addition, Model ABC is the same as in Table 4, except that we compute all performance 
evaluation metrics using the reduced test sample. 
 The broad inference in Table 6 is similar to that in Table 4.  The results show no evidence of 
improved performance of the Human Selection Model with the revised sample compared to the full 
sample. This outcome suggests that the weaker performance of the Human Selection Model is unlikely 
to be due to top school recruiters placing greater weight  on teaching than on research potential  in 
recruitment. 
4.4. Citation-weighted research productivity 
 In our primary analysis, we measure a candidate ’s research productivity by counting top- tier 
journal publications. However, this measure has a limitation—it does not account for the impact  of the 
publications. To address this concern, we adjust the publication count for impact  by weighing each 
candidate i’s publications based on their Google Scholar citation counts measured as of July 24, 2024. 
The weighted publication count is computed using the formula:   
𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝_𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊ℎ𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖= 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖∗ 𝐶𝐶𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝐶𝐶𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑘𝑘
#𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑘𝑘𝑖𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑟 𝑟𝑟𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑟𝑟 𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑏𝑏ℎ
𝑘𝑘=1
 29 
 
Where 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 is the number of top journal publications for candidate i, and 𝐶𝐶𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖 denotes the 
number of citations for all top journal publications by candidate i. Using this adjusted performance 
measure, we redefine the research productivity indicators based on the same percentile cutoffs, denoting 
them as pub_w_top_Xpct, where X=5, 10, 20, or 30, according to 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝_𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊ℎ𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖.10   
 Table 7 presents the test results for the research productivity prediction models using these 
weighted measures across various K cutoffs for the test years 2017 (Panel A) and 2018 (Panel B). The 
results show that our inferences remain robust to adjustments for publication quality. 
 We also replicate the analysis in Table 4 using citation -weighted publications. The results are 
shown in Table 8 for the test years 2017 (Panel A) and 2018 (Panel B) . Again, we find qualitatively 
similar inferences to those in Table 4.  The only notable exception is the test year 2017 with 𝐾𝐾= 5%, 
where Model ABC underperforms the Human Selection Model based on NDCG@K, although the two 
models perform comparably when Precision@K or LIFT is used as the evaluation metric. 
4.5. Shapley value analysis  
 Given that rookie job candidates ’ resumes and related information, such as school and BYU 
rankings, are readily accessible to human recruiters, an important question arises: why do recruiters fail 
to incorporate this value- relevant information effectively into  their faculty selection decisions? W e 
investigate this issue by constructing an alternative machine-learning prediction model, referred to as 
 
10 Because citation counts generally increase over time, publications closer to our citation measurement date (July 
24, 2024) are expected to accumulate fewer citations. To account for this, we also construct a measure of research 
productivity that adjusts ci tation counts based on each publication’s proximity to the measurement date. Our 
inferences remain qualitatively unchanged (untabulated). 30 
 
the “Initial Placement Model,” that uses the same predictors (A, B, and C) to predict the school rankings 
of candidates’ initial placement institutions. 
 To align with the definitions of the dependent variables of research productivity for Model ABC 
in Table 3, we convert the continuous initial placement ranking variable into dichotomous variables 
with the same cutoffs: 5%, 10%, 20%, and 30%. These variables are denoted as job_top_Xpct, where 
X = 5, 10, 20, or 30. Descriptive statistics for these dependent variables are presented in Table 2, while 
the results for the Initial Placement Models are reported in Table OA3 of the Online Appendix for test 
years 2017 (Panel A) and 2018 (Panel B), respectively. 
 To explore how Model ABC and the Initial Placement Model differ in their use of predictors 
A, B, and C, we use Shapley values (SHAP) to assess the importance of each predictor in each model. 
Shapley analysis, derived from cooperative game theory, distributes the total gains among players based 
on their individual contributions, providing insight into the relative importance of each feature in a 
model’s predictions. 
 Because the ensemble method combines the three sets of predictors (A, B, and C) in both 
models, we first compute the Shapley values for each feature in the individual base models and then 
aggregate these values to compare and rank feature importance (Lundberg et al. 2020; Abdullakutty 
and Naseem 2024). To ensure comparability across different predictor sets, we normalize the Shapley 
values within each model so that the sum of their absolute values equals 1, following the methodology 
of Leinonen et al. (2023). Specifically, for each test year, we calculate the Shapley values for all 
predictors, sum their absolute values within the predictor set, and divide each individual Shapley value 31 
 
by this total. This normalization ensures that the sum of the absolute Shapley values for each base model 
equals 1, allowing a fair comparison of the relative contributions of predictors across models. 
 Given the large number of features in the combined predictor list of A, B, and C, we follow the 
approach of Chen and Ke (2026) by focusing on the top 10 most important features for each model, as 
determined by their Shapley values. Table 9 presents the results for the test years 2017 (Panel A) and 
2018 (Panel B).  
4.5.1. The top 10 features of Model ABC 
We first focus on the top 10 features of Model ABC for the test year 2017 in Panel A. Several 
patterns emerge. First, a stable core of predictors appears across the dependent variable specifications, 
including measures of collaboration breadth ( number of coauthors ), professional membership  and 
reference prominence (e.g., reference_first , reference_high, reference_mean), institutional prestige 
(PhD_top), and early research achievement (number of awards and number of top R&R papers).  
Second, the relative importance of these predictors varies with the cutoff used to define research 
productivity. For the most selective research productivity cutoffs (top 5% and 10%), early distinction 
signals—particularly awards and high -quality R&R outcomes— rank most prominently. In contrast, for 
broader research productivity definitions (top 20% and 30%), collaboration-based measures dominate, 
with the number of coauthors ranked first and additional network characteristics (e.g., coauthor_high, 
coauthor_top, number_of_coauthor_2degree) entering the top ranks.  
Third, the estimated signs are generally intuitive: awards, coauthorship breadth, R&R quality, 
and doctoral program prestige are positively associated with future productivity. However, consistent 32 
 
with the model's multivariate nature, several predictors exhibit negative associations that likely reflect 
conditional trade-offs rather than unconditional effects. The coefficient on the number of memberships 
is negative across specifications, suggesting that, holding other characteristics constant, extensive 
committee or association involvement may proxy for time allocated away from research activities. 
Similarly, reference-based prominence measures (e.g., reference_high and reference_first) enter with 
negative signs , suggesting that stronger reference reputations are negatively correlated with future 
research productivity. Finally, at higher productivity cutoffs, measures of coauthor reputation (e.g., 
coauthor_high, coauthor_top, and coauthor_mean) are negatively associated with future productivity. 
These interpretations should be viewed with caution, as Shapley- based importance measures  
conditional predictive contributions rather than structural causal effects. 
The 2018 Shapley value results for Model ABC reinforce the main findings from 2017. Extreme 
productivity is most closely linked to early quality and citation signals, whereas broader upper -tier 
productivity is more strongly associated with the breadth of collaboration and professional 
embeddedness. There exists modest year-to-year variation in the relative ranking of these dimensions. 
In addition, the signs of key variables are highly stable across the two test years. Awards, coauthorship 
breadth, R&R-based measures, doctoral program prestige, and reviewer experience remain positively 
associated with future productivity, while the number of memberships  and several conditional 
reputation measures (e.g., reference_first  and reference_high) continue to have  negative marginal 
contributions. These patterns suggest that the cross -year differences primarily reflect reweighting 
among closely related predictors rather than a structural change in the model’s economic interpretation. 33 
 
4.5.2. The top 10 features of the Initial Placement Model 
We now turn to the top 10 features of the initial placement models . We start with an analysis 
of the test year 2017. Across all cutoff definitions (5%, 10%, 20%, and 30%), several predictors 
consistently rank among the most important features and can be grouped into four broad economic 
categories. First, measures of research productivity and visibility—most notably , the number of awards 
and presentations—appear in all four models and are uniformly positively associated with top 
placements. Presentations at top conferences ( number of presentations at top conferences ) also enter 
prominently in the 10% and 20% specifications with positive signs. These patterns suggest that external 
validation and professional visibility are strongly associated with favorable placement outcomes across 
the distribution, consistent with the view that hiring committees reward signals of research momentum 
and peer recognition. 
Second, advisor and reference quality variables appear in most specifications. Measures such 
as reference_first, reference_mean, and reference_high enter three or more models, although their signs 
are not always stable across cutoffs. Their repeated inclusion nevertheless indicates that the reference 
writer's reputation is an important predictor of initial placement, particularly at more selective 
thresholds. 
Third, network and coauthor characteristics frequently emerge as important predictors. 
Variables such as coauthor_high, number_of_coauthor_2degree, and number of membership appear 
across multiple cutoffs. While their estimated signs vary in some cases, the number of memberships is 34 
 
consistently negative in the 10%, 20%, and 30% models, suggesting that broader but potentially weaker 
affiliations may not translate into stronger placement outcomes. 
Finally, educational background —captured by PhD_top— enters the 5% and 20% 
specifications with a positive sign. This finding is consistent with institutional prestige serving as a 
salient signal in the academic job market.  
Taken together, the Shapley value results for test year 2017 indicate that research productivity, 
reference quality, network characteristics, and doctoral program prestige jointly shape initial placement 
outcomes, with productivity- related measures exhibiting the most consistent positive associations 
across cutoff definitions. 
We next move to the Shapley value results for the initial placement models for the test year 
2018. We find that both test years share a common structure: research productivity, reference quality, 
network characteristics, and doctoral prestige jointly shape initial placement outcomes. Although the 
relative importance of specific variables shifts across years and cutoffs, the underly ing economic 
categories that drive placements remain remarkably stable. 
4.5.3. Differences between Model ABC and the Initial Placement Model 
 Turning to a comparison of the top 10 features in the Initial Placement Model and Model ABC, 
several observations emerge. Although the two models share several highly ranked features, their 
feature compositions differ substantially, particularly at lower cutoff levels. For example, visibility-
related variables—such as number of presentations and number of presentations at top conferences—
and specialization in financial accounting ( primaryResearchArea_financial) appear more frequently 35 
 
among the top 10 features in the Initial Placement Model. In contrast, Model ABC places greater weight 
on measures of collaboration breadth (e.g., coauthors), reference prominence (e.g., reference_first , 
reference_high, reference_mean), institutional prestige ( PhD_top), and early research achievement 
(e.g., number of R&R papers and number of top R&R papers).  
Second, the direction of feature importance often diverges between the two models, particularly 
at lower cutoffs such as K=5% and 10%. For instance, in test year 2017, while Model ABC finds that 
advisors' reputation (reference_high) and coauthors' mean reputation (coauthor_mean) negatively 
predict a rookie candidate’s future research productivity, the Initial Placement Model assigns positive 
weights to these factors. Conversely, Model ABC views external visibility (number of presentations) 
listed on a candi date’s resume as a negative predictor of future productivity, whereas the Initial 
Placement Model assigns a positive weight to this factor. 
 Even when the directions of feature importance align between the two models, the feature 
weightings differ significantly. For example, although the number of top R&R papers  contributes 
positively in both models, it appears among the top 10 features only in Model ABC. Given that Model 
ABC outperforms human recruiters at predicting research productivity, these differences in Shapley 
values suggest that human recruiters misallocate weights among predictors, which likely contributes to 
their relatively weaker performance. 
4.6. Implications of Model ABC for the accounting profession’s rookie talent distribution 
Given that machine learning has not yet been adopted in rookie faculty recruitment, it is 
informative to explore the potential impact of implementing our best -performing model, Model ABC, 36 
 
on the allocation of accounting rookie talent across institutions. We conduct a hypothetical analysis 
under two simplifying assumptions: (i) recruiters base hiring decisions solely on candidates’ predicted 
research potential, and (ii) rookie candidates alw ays accept offers from the highest -ranked institution, 
where institutional rankings are determined by a combination of U.S. News & World Report and QS 
World University Rankings. 
We evaluate the impact of Model ABC in two steps. First, we compute the market share of top-
tier journal publications over the five -year post -graduation period —both unadjusted and citation-
adjusted—for the rookies actually hired by the top 10 U.S. schools in each test year (denoted as 
SHARE_UNADJ and SHARE_ADJ, respectively). In both 2017 and 2018, these schools hired 10 
candidates, representing less than 5% of the rookie market in each year. We refer to this group as the 
“Human Hired Group.” Second, we ide ntify the same number of candidates using Model ABC’s 
predicted pub_top_5pct scores and compute the same market-share measures for this group, denoted as 
the “ML Selected Group.” We use pub_top_5pct  to match the actual hiring proportion of the top 10 
schools in both years. 
Table 1 0 reports the top 10 schools’ market share of top- tier publications — measured by 
SHARE_UNADJ and SHARE_ADJ—for both the Human Hired Group and the ML Selected Group. 
Based on SHARE_UNADJ, the 10 rookies actually hired by the top 10 schools account for 17.19% and 
22.77% of all top journal publications in the five years following graduation for the 2017 and 2018 
cohorts, respectively. In contrast, had these schools hired the top 10 candidates as ranked by Model 
ABC, their market share would have risen to 31.25% and 25.74%, reflecting economically meaningful 37 
 
increases of 82 % and 13 %, respectively. Results using the citation- adjusted measure, SHARE_ADJ, 
yield qualitatively similar conclusions. Taken together, these findings highlight the potential for 
machine learning–based hiring models to significantly alter the distribution of aca demic talent across 
institutions. 
5. Are there systematic biases in human recruiters’ selection outcomes?  
 In this section, we examine whether human recruiters ’ suboptimal weighting of predictors A, 
B, and C represents  systematic biases against specific groups of candidates. To investigate this, we 
develop a metric, denoted as gap_Kpct _prob, which quantifies the discrepancy between predictions 
generated by Model ABC and those produced by the Initial Placement Model  at each cutoff K. 
Specifically, f or each test year, we calculate 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝(𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝_𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝐾𝐾𝑝𝑝𝐾𝐾𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴), representing the predicted 
probabilities of pub_top_Kpct for Model ABC. Similarly, we compute 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝(𝑗𝑗𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝐾𝐾𝑝𝑝𝐾𝐾𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴) for the 
Initial Placement Model , which represents the predicted probabilities of job_top_Kpct for the initial 
placement outcomes. gap_Kpct_prob is defined as follows: 
𝑊𝑊𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝_𝐾𝐾𝑝𝑝𝐾𝐾𝑡𝑡_𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝= 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝(𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝_𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝐾𝐾𝑝𝑝𝐾𝐾𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴) − 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝(𝑗𝑗𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝_𝐾𝐾𝑝𝑝𝐾𝐾𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴) 
Since both Model ABC and the Initial Placement Model rely solely on information available at the time 
of rookie faculty recruitment and are evaluated out of sample, gap_Kpct_prob serves as a reliable proxy 
for the potential difference between the optimal outcomes (as predicted by Model ABC) and the actual 
outcomes chosen by human recruiters (as represented by the Initial Placement Model ). A 
gap_Kpct_prob value of 0 indicates that Model ABC’s prediction perfectly aligns with that of the Initial 
Placement Model. A positive value suggests that human recruiters underestimate a candidate’s research 38 
 
productivity relative to the optimal one , while a negative value indicates that human recruiters 
overestimate a candidate’s research productivity relative to the optimal one. 
 We then investigate whether gap_Kpct_prob varies systematically with the following two 
categories of candidate characteristics: (i) demographic characteristics, including gender, whether the 
candidate is Asian (second_language_asia), whether the candidate is European 
(second_language_euro); and (ii) institution background, including whether the candidate earned a PhD 
from a top -10 business school as ranked by U.S. News ( PhD_top10), and whether the candidate ’s 
primary dissertation advisor ranks in the top 10% of the BYU ranking list for accounting journal 
publications in the test year (reference_top). 
Table 11 reports the regression results. Panel A presents descriptive statistics for 
gap_Kpct_prob across alternative cutoff values of 𝐾𝐾. The mean gap_Kpct_prob is positive when K=5% 
and 10%  but negative when K=20% and 30%. This pattern suggests that, on average, the human 
recruiters’ Initial Placement Model underestimates the future research productivity of top- performing 
rookies and overestimates the productivity of moderately performing rookies. 
Panel B reports the OLS estimates for gap_Kpct_prob, where all candidate characteristics are 
included in a single specification. Regarding demographic characteristics, we find that the coefficients 
on gender and second_language_asia are generally statistically insignificant across cutoffs, providing 
no evidence of systematic human bias against female candidates or candidates with an Asian language 
background. In contrast, the coefficient on second_language_euro is negative at all cutoff values and 
statistically significant for K=20% and 30%. This pattern suggests that recruiters tend to overestimate 39 
 
the future research productivity of candidates with a European language background at higher cutoff 
levels. 
Regarding institutional background, we find that the coefficient on PhD_top10 is negative 
across all cutoffs and statistically significant for  K=10% and 20% , while the coefficient on 
reference_top is negative at all cutoffs and significant for K=10%, 20%, and 30%. Taken together, these 
findings are consistent with recruiters systematically overestimating the expected productivity of 
candidates from elite PhD programs and those endorsed by leading accounting scholars during the initial 
hiring stage. 
6. Conclusion  
This study examines whether limited information available at the initial stage of the employee 
selection process can be used to develop an effective machine learning model for candidate screening. 
We focus on accounting rookies, whose positions require substantial discretion and sustained research 
productivity, and evaluate whether résumés, publicly available metrics  on academic institutions, PhD 
advisors, and coauthors, and job market papers predict long-term research output. 
We find that résumé-based information alone is a strong predictor of subsequent performance 
and, in several specifications, outperforms human screening decisions. In addition, the machine learning 
model exhibits lower bias relative to human recruiters. Tak en together, these findings suggest that 
models based on information readily available early in the recruitment process can improve screening 
accuracy and mitigate inefficiencies inherent in human-centered hiring. 40 
 
This research makes several important contributions. First, it highlights the utility of machine 
learning in addressing a longstanding challenge in recruitment: identifying high -potential candidates 
from large applicant pools during initial screening with limited candidate information. By focusing on 
academic hiring— a context that requires high discretion and long- term productivity—we extend the 
scope of existing research, such as Chen and Ke (2026) on machine learning in recruitment, which has 
largely been limited to entry-level positions with minimal discretion. Second, our study underscores the 
predictive power of resumes, a widely accessible and underutilized resource in hiring decisions. By 
integrating resume data with public metrics, our models achieve significant performance gains, offering 
a scalable solutio n for improving recruitment outcomes. Third, we provide a novel comparison of 
machine learning predictions with human selection decisions,  revealing systematic biases and 
suboptimal weighting of predictors in human judgment that could be overcome by machine learning. 
 The findings have important practical implications. For academic institutions, machine learning 
models can complement traditional recruitment processes, reducing biases and inefficiencies while 
improving the likelihood of long -term success among hires. These models also offer a cost -effective 
and scalable alternative to resource- intensive interview processes, particularly at the initial stages of 
screening.  
 More broadly, organizations in non-academic sectors could adopt  similar approaches to 
streamline recruitment. The demonstrated effectiveness of resumes as predictors suggests that 
organizations could refine their screening methods without extensive reliance on proprietary or 41 
 
confidential data. However, it is essential to ensure that machine learning models are applied ethically, 
with attention to potential biases in training data that may perpetuate discrimination. 
 While our study provides valuable insights, it also raises important questions for future 
research. First, extending the analysis to other academic disciplines and job types would validate the 
generalizability of these findings. Future studies could explore roles that require different combinations 
of technical and interpersonal skills to examine the applicability of resume- based predictions across  
diverse contexts.  
Second, incorporating additional data sources, such as structured evaluations of soft skills or 
references, could further enhance model performance in roles that emphasize leadership and 
collaboration. Advances in natural language processing may enable the inclusion of qualitative data, 
such as interview transcripts or letters of recommendation, into predictive models. 
 Finally, longitudinal studies are needed to examine the broader organizational impacts of 
integrating machine learning into talent recruitment. These studies should consider not only the 
predictive accuracy of models but also their effects on workforce diversity, retention rates, and overall 
productivity. Addressing these questions will be critical for designing recruitment processes that are 
both effective and equitable. 
 42 
 
References 
Abdullakutty, F., and U. Naseem. 2024. Decoding memes: a comprehensive analysis of late and early fusion 
models for explainable meme analysis. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 
2024, 1681–1689. Singapore: ACM. 
Aburass, S., and M. A. Rumman. 2024. Quantifying overfitting: introducing the overfitting index. In 2024 
International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Energy Technologies, 1–7. 
Austin, P. C., and E. A. Stuart. 2015. Moving towards best practice when using inverse probability of 
treatment weighting (IPTW) using the propensity score to estimate causal treatment effects in 
observational studies. Statistics in Medicine 34 (28): 3661–3679. 
Baltrušaitis, T., C. Ahuja, and L.-P. Morency. 2019. Multimodal machine learning: A survey and taxonomy. 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 41 (2): 423–443. 
Bao, Y ., B. Ke, B. Li, Y . J. Y u, and J. Zhang. 2020. Detecting accounting fraud in publicly traded us firms 
using a machine learning approach. Journal of Accounting Research 58 (1): 199–235. 
Bello, M., L. Alejandra, E. Bonilla, C. Hernandez, B. Pedroza, and A. Portilla. 2020. A novel profile’s 
selection algorithm using AI. Applied Computer Science 16 (1): 18–32. 
Boushey, H., and S. J. Glynn. 2012. There are significant business costs to replacing employees. Center for 
American Progress 16: 1–9. 
Campion, E. D., M. A. Campion, J. Johnson, T. R. Carretta, S. Romay, B. Dirr, A. Deregla, and A. Mouton. 
2024. Using natural language processing to increase prediction and reduce subgroup differences in 
personnel selection decisions. Journal of Applied Psychology 109 (3): 307. 
Casas-Arce, P., M. M. Cheng, I. Grabner, and S. Modell. 2022. Managerial accounting for decision-making 
and planning. Journal of Management Accounting Research 34 (1): 1–7. 
Chakraborty, I., K. Chiong, H. Dover, and K. Sudhir. 2024. Can AI and AI-hybrids detect persuasion skills? 
Salesforce hiring with conversational video interviews. Marketing Science 44 (1): 30–53. 
Chen, C., and B. Ke. 2026. The Predictive Value of Job Application Data in Initial Applicant Screening . 
Working paper. 
Conley, J. P., and A. S. Önder. 2014. The research productivity of new PhDs in economics: The surprisingly 
high non-success of the successful. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (3): 205–216. 
Crump, R. K., V . J. Hotz, G. W. Imbens, and O. A. Mitnik. 2009. Dealing with limited overlap in estimation 
of average treatment effects. Biometrika 96 (1): 187–199. 
Defazio, D., A. Lockett, and M. Wright. 2009. Funding incentives, collaborative dynamics and scientific 
productivity: Evidence from the EU framework program. Research Policy 38 (2): 293–305. 
Deller, C. 2023. Beyond performance: does assessed potential matter to employees’ voluntary departure 
decisions? Journal of Accounting Research 61 (4): 981–1024. 
Ding, K., B. Lev, X. Peng, T. Sun, and M. A. Vasarhelyi. 2020. Machine learning improves accounting 
estimates: evidence from insurance payments. Review of Accounting Studies 25 (3): 1098–1134. 
Ductor, L. 2015. Does co- authorship lead to higher academic productivity? Oxford Bulletin of Economics 
and Statistics 77 (3): 385–407. 
Ductor, L., M. Fafchamps, S. Goyal, and M. J. van der Leij. 2014. Social networks and research output. 
Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5): 936–948. 43 
 
Ductor, L., and B. Visser. 2022. When a coauthor joins an editorial board. Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization 200: 576–595. 
Goodfellow, I., Y . Bengio, and A. Courville. 2016. Deep learning. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
Grabner, I., J. Künneke, and F. Moers. 2025. Promotion decisions and the adoption of explicit potential 
assessment. Management Science 71 (11): 9233–9255. 
Gulbrandsen, M., and J.-C. Smeby. 2005. Industry funding and university professors’ research performance. 
Research Policy 34 (6): 932–950. 
Harris, C. G. 2018. Making better job hiring decisions using “human in the loop” techniques. In Proceedings 
of the 2nd International Workshop on Augmenting Intelligence with Humans-in-the-Loop, 16–26. 
Hernan, M. A., and J. M. Robins. 2020. Causal Inference: What If. CRC Press. 
Hilmer, M., and C. E. Hilmer. 2012. On the search for talent in academic labor markets: Easily observable 
later-graduate study outcomes as predictors of early- career publishing, placement, and tenure. 
Economic Inquiry 50 (1): 232–247. 
Hoffman, M., L. Kahn, and D. Li. 2018. Discretion in hiring. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2): 765–
800. 
Hussey, A., S. Murray, and W. Stock. 2022. Gender, coauthorship, and academic outcomes in economics. 
Economic Inquiry 60 (2): 465–484. 
Kahneman, D., O. Sibony, and C. R. Sunstein. 2021. Noise: A flaw in human judgment. New York, NY , USA: 
Little, Brown Spark. 
Kaplan, R. S. 1998. Creating new management practice through innovation action research. SSRN Scholarly 
Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. 
Kmail, A. B., M. Maree, M. Belkhatir, and S. M. Alhashmi. 2015. An automatic online recruitment system 
based on exploiting multiple semantic resources and concept -relatedness measures. In 2015 IEEE 
27th International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI), 620–627. 
Krapf, M., H. W. Ursprung, and C. Zimmermann. 2017. Parenthood and productivity of highly skilled labor: 
Evidence from the groves of academe. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 140: 147–
175. 
Labro, E. 2025. Thoughts on management accounting research at The Accounting Review’s centennial. The 
Accounting Review 100 (6): 373–384. 
Lee, D., and C. Ahn. 2020. Industrial human resource management optimization based on skills and 
characteristics. Computers & Industrial Engineering 144: 106463. 
Leinonen, J., U. Hamann, I. Sideris, and U. Germann. 2023. Thunderstorm nowcasting with deep learning: 
A multi‐hazard data fusion model. Geophysical Research Letters 50 (8): e2022GL101626. 
Lerner, A., and P. Bergman. 2024. Are recruiters better than a coin flip at judging resumes? Here’s the data. 
https://interviewing.io/blog/are-recruiters-better-than-a-coin-flip-at-judging-resumes. 
Li, D., L. R. Raymond, and P. Bergman. 2026. Hiring as exploration. Review of Economic Studies 93 (2): 
1200–1240. 
Liu, M. 2022. Assessing Human Information Processing in Lending Decisions: A Machine Learning 
Approach. Journal of Accounting Research 60 (2): 607–651. 
Lundberg, S. M., G. Erion, H. Chen, A. DeGrave, J. M. Prutkin, B. Nair, R. Katz, J. Himmelfarb, N. Bansal, 
and S.-I. Lee. 2020. From local explanations to global understanding with explainable AI for trees. 44 
 
Nature machine intelligence 2 (1): 56–67. 
Malinowski, J., T. Keim, O. Wendt, and T. Weitzel. 2006. Matching people and jobs: A bilateral 
recommendation approach. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS’06), 6:137c–137c. IEEE. 
Manad, O., M. Bentounsi, and P. Darmon. 2018. Enhancing talent search by integrating and querying big 
HR data. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 4095–4100. IEEE. 
Manthei, K., D. Sliwka, and T. V ogelsang. 2023. Information, incentives, and attention: a field experiment 
on the interaction of management controls. The Accounting Review 98 (5): 455–479. 
Meier, F. J., and S. Laumer. 2022. Machine learning in HR staffing. In Handbook of Research on Artificial 
Intelligence in Human Resource Management. Edward Elgar. 
Merchant, K. A., and W. A. V . der Stede. 2017. Management Control Systems: Performance Measurement, 
Evaluation and Incentives. Pearson. 
Mullainathan, S. 2025. Economics in the age of algorithms. AEA Papers and Proceedings 115: 1–23. 
Ng, A. 2021. A chat with Andrew on MLOps: from model -centric to data -centric AI. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06-AZXmwHjo. 
Oyer, P. 2006. Initial labor market conditions and long-term outcomes for economists. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 20 (3): 143–160. 
Pereira, L. M., A. Salazar, and L. Vergara. 2023. A comparative analysis of early and late fusion for the 
multimodal two-class problem. IEEE Access 11: 84283–84300. 
Qin, C., L. Zhang, Y . Cheng, R. Zha, D. Shen, Q. Zhang, X. Chen, et al. 2024. A comprehensive survey of 
artificial intelligence techniques for talent analytics. arXiv:2307.03195. 
Qin, C., H. Zhu, T. Xu, C. Zhu, C. Ma, E. Chen, and H. Xiong. 2020. An enhanced neural network approach 
to person-job fit in talent recruitment. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 38 (2): 1–
33. 
Roelofs, R. 2019. Measuring Generalization and Overfitting in Machine Learning. University of California, 
Berkeley. 
Sajjadiani, S., A. J. Sojourner, J. D. Kammeyer-Mueller, and E. Mykerezi. 2019. Using machine learning to 
translate applicant work history into predictors of performance and turnover. Journal of Applied 
Psychology 104 (10): 1207. 
Schnabel, T., A. Swaminathan, A. Singh, N. Chandak, and T. Joachims. 2016. Recommendations as 
treatments: debiasing learning and evaluation. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference 
on Machine Learning, 1670–1679. PMLR. 
Shen, D., H. Zhu, C. Zhu, T. Xu, C. Ma, and H. Xiong. 2018. A joint learning approach to intelligent job 
interview assessment. In Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 3542–3548. IJCAI’18. Stockholm, Sweden: AAAI Press. 
Strohmeier, S. 2022. Handbook of Research on Artificial Intelligence in Human Resource Management . 
Edward Elgar. 
Swaminathan, A., and T. Joachims. 2015. Counterfactual risk minimization: learning from logged bandit 
feedback. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 814– 823. 
PMLR. 
Webster, R., J. Rabin, L. Simon, and F. Jurie. 2019. Detecting overfitting of deep generative networks via 45 
 
latent recovery. In , 11273–11282. 
Yadav, A., J. McHale, and S. O’Neill. 2023. How does co-authoring with a star affect scientists’ productivity? 
Evidence from small open economies. Research Policy 52 (1): 104660. 
Zaroor, A., M. Maree, and M. Sabha. 2017. JRC: A job post and resume classification system for online 
recruitment. In 2017 IEEE 29th International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence 
(ICTAI), 780–787. IEEE. 
Zhu, C., H. Zhu, H. Xiong, C. Ma, F. Xie, P. Ding, and P . Li. 2018. Person-job fit: Adapting the right talent 
for the right job with joint representation learning. ACM Transactions on Management Information 
Systems (TMIS) 9 (3): 1–17. 
 46 
 
Figure 1. Training set, validation set, and test set split 
 
 
 
  
Training / Validation set
(random 80/20 split)
Test set
2015 2016 2017
Test set
2015 2016 2017 2018
Training / Validation set
(random 80/20 split)
Test year 2017:
Test year 2018:47 
 
Table 1. Sample selection procedures  
original files (number of applicants) 728 
remove non-rookie applicants -53 
remove applicants without CV or dissertation -47 
remove duplicated applications of the same person in the same year -50 
remove applications of the same person in different years by keeping the earliest one -9 
final sample = 569 
      2015 152 
      2016 141 
      2017 145 
      2018 131 
  48 
 
Table 2. Descriptive statistics  
 mean std min 25% 50% 75% max 
Panel A: Dependent variables 
pub_top_5pct 0.07 0.25 0 0 0 0 1 
pub_top_10pct 0.16 0.37 0 0 0 0 1 
pub_top_20pct 0.31 0.46 0 0 0 1 1 
pub_top_30pct 0.41 0.49 0 0 0 1 1 
job_top_5pct 0.05 0.21 0 0 0 0 1 
job_top_10pct 0.08 0.28 0 0 0 0 1 
job_top_20pct 0.18 0.39 0 0 0 0 1 
job_top_30pct 0.30 0.46 0 0 0 1 1 
Panel B: Predictors extracted from the resume and public sources (Predictors A and B) 
gender 0.58 0.49 0 0 1 1 1 
has Bachelor honor 0.47 0.50 0 0 0 1 1 
has Master honor 0.21 0.41 0 0 0 0 1 
has PhD honor 0.05 0.22 0 0 0 0 1 
number of published papers 0.53 1.02 0 0 0 1 12 
number of R&R papers 0.32 0.63 0 0 0 1 5 
number of papers in progress 2.74 1.55 0 2 3 4 9 
has_coauthor 0.96 0.21 0 1 1 1 1 
has_reference 0.83 0.38 0 1 1 1 1 
number of coauthors 4.49 2.72 0 3 4 6 18 
number of presentations 6.72 4.59 0 4 6 9 30 
number of teaching experiences 3.82 2.29 0 2 3 5 13 
number of awards 4.48 3.10 0 2 4 6 17 
number of reviewers 1.67 1.76 0 0 1 3 11 
number of membership 1.23 1.63 0 0 0 2 7 
number of working experiences 2.38 1.74 0 1 2 3 11 
had academic work 0.65 0.48 0 0 1 1 1 
had non-academic work 0.76 0.43 0 1 1 1 1 
provide abstract 0.38 0.49 0 0 0 1 1 
PrimaryResearchArea_financial 0.64 0.48 0 0 1 1 1 
PrimaryResearchArea_auditing 0.15 0.36 0 0 0 0 1 
PrimaryResearchArea_managerial 0.12 0.33 0 0 0 0 1 
PrimaryResearchArea_tax 0.05 0.23 0 0 0 0 1 
PrimaryResearchMethod_archival 0.74 0.44 0 0 1 1 1 
PrimaryResearchMethod_experiment 0.15 0.36 0 0 0 0 1 
PrimaryResearchMethod_analytical 0.08 0.27 0 0 0 0 1 
multi_language 0.19 0.39 0 0 0 0 1 
Bachelor_top 0.20 0.40 0 0 0 0 1 
Master_top 0.29 0.45 0 0 0 1 1 
PhD_top 0.45 0.50 0 0 0 1 1 
visit_top 0.07 0.25 0 0 0 0 1 
number of top published papers 0.08 0.30 0 0 0 0 2 
number of top R&R papers 0.16 0.40 0 0 0 0 2 49 
 
coauthor_mean 1486.40 1128.96 0 565.20 1386.43 2021 5614 
coauthor_high 470.78 939.46 0 26 131 430 5614 
number_of_coauthor_2degree 37.51 31.97 0 14 30 51 202 
coauthor_top 0.29 0.46 0 0 0 1 1 
number of presentations at top conferences 1.56 1.80 0 0 1 2 10 
reference_first 651.12 1082.80 0 52 252 708 5614 
reference_mean 882.12 864.48 0 252 644.75 1245.20 5614 
reference_high 231.17 412 0 19 114 252 5614 
second_language_asia 0.11 0.32 0 0 0 0 1 
second_language_euro 0.22 0.41 0 0 0 0 1 
Placerank 9.05 3.16 1 8 11 11 11 
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the dependent variables and the observable predictors extracted 
from candidates’ resumes (Predictors A) and external public sources (Predictor s B) for the full sample of rookie 
candidates from 2015 to 2018. Panel A reports the four research productivity indicators, pub_top_5pct, 
pub_top_10pct, pub_top_20pct, and  pub_top_30pct, and the four initial placement indicators, job_top_5pct, 
job_top_10pct, job_top_20pct, and  job_top_30pct. Panel B reports summary statistics for Predictors A and B. 
Predictors C are omitted because they are text embeddings and are difficult to interpret. See Appendix A for 
detailed variable definitions. 
  50 
 
Table 3. Prediction performance of rookie candidates’ research productivity 
Panel A. Test year 2017 
Predictor Mean DV NDCG@K Precision@K LIFT 
Subpanel A: DV = pub_top_5pct 
A 6.21 59.18 44.44 716.05 
B 6.21 61.92 55.56 895.06 
C 6.21 22.24 22.22 358.02 
ABC 6.21 83.07 77.78 1253.09 
Subpanel B: DV = pub_top_10pct 
A 9.66 41.90 28.57 295.92 
B 9.66 39.50 28.57 295.92 
C 9.66 24.78 28.57 295.92 
ABC 9.66 48.20 35.71 369.90 
Subpanel C: DV = pub_top_20pct 
A 21.38 39.65 35.48 165.97 
B 21.38 53.58 45.16 211.24 
C 21.38 46.53 51.61 241.42 
ABC 21.38 57.44 48.39 226.33 
Subpanel D: DV = pub_top_30pct 
A 43.45 68.59 63.49 146.13 
B 43.45 67.12 66.67 153.44 
C 43.45 55.12 55.56 127.87 
ABC 43.45 73.95 69.84 160.75 
 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
Predictor Mean DV NDCG@K Precision@K LIFT 
Subpanel A: DV = pub_top_5pct 
A 6.11 25.29 12.50 204.69 
B 6.11 32.95 37.50 614.06 
C 6.11 41.25 25.00 409.38 
ABC 6.11 57.27 50.00 818.75 
Subpanel B: DV = pub_top_10pct 
A 18.32 33.24 29.17 159.20 
B 18.32 50.63 37.50 204.69 
C 18.32 39.65 33.33 181.94 
ABC 18.32 48.94 37.50 204.69 
Subpanel C: DV = pub_top_20pct 
A 42.75 43.69 44.64 104.43 
B 42.75 66.18 58.93 137.85 
C 42.75 50.13 50.00 116.96 
ABC 42.75 60.13 58.93 137.85 
Subpanel D: DV = pub_top_30pct 51 
 
A 42.75 44.73 44.64 104.43 
B 42.75 64.30 57.14 133.67 
C 42.75 60.48 55.36 129.50 
ABC 42.75 59.04 58.93 137.85 
 
Notes: This table reports the out-of-sample predictive performance of models forecasting rookie candidates’ future 
research productivity. Panel A reports results for the test year 2017. Panel B reports results for the test year 2018. 
Predictors A includes variables extracted directly from candidates’ resumes, P redictors B includes variables 
constructed from external public knowledge, P redictors C includes text embeddings from the job market paper, 
and ABC is the late -fusion ensemble model that averages the predicted probabilities from the three individual 
models. Mean DV is the unconditional mean of the dependent variable in the test sample. NDCG@K, 
Precision@K, and LIFT are defined in Appendix C.  
  52 
 
Table 4. Comparing the prediction performance of Model ABC and the Human Selection Model  
Panel A. Test year 2017 
 
pub_top_5pct pub_top_10pct pub_top_20pct pub_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Human Selection Model 
Mean DV 6.21 9.66 21.38 43.45 
NDCG@K 30.62 23.21 44.58 57.59 
Precision@K 33.33 21.43 41.94 52.38 
LIFT 537.04 221.94 196.15 120.56 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 6.21 9.66 21.38 43.45 
NDCG@K 83.07 48.20 57.44 73.95 
Precision@K 77.78 35.71 48.39 69.84 
LIFT 1253.09 369.90 226.33 160.75 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
 
pub_top_5pct pub_top_10pct pub_top_20pct pub_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Human Selection Model 
Mean DV 6.11 18.32 42.75 42.75 
NDCG@K 34.18 40.91 64.97 64.97 
Precision@K 37.50 29.17 60.71 60.71 
LIFT 614.06 159.20 142.03 142.03 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 6.11 18.32 42.75 42.75 
NDCG@K 57.27 48.94 60.13 59.04 
Precision@K 50.00 37.50 58.93 58.93 
LIFT 818.75 204.69 137.85 137.85 
 
Notes: This table compares the out -of-sample prediction performance of Model ABC and the Human Selection 
Model in forecasting research productivity. The Human Selection Model uses the decile ranking of the candidate’s 
initial placement institution as the s ole predictor. Panel A reports test year 2017,  and Panel B reports test year 
2018. The results for Model ABC are copied from Table 3. Mean DV is the unconditional mean of the dependent 
variable in the test sample. NDCG@K, Precision@K, and LIFT are defined in Appendix C.   53 
 
Table 5. Comparing the prediction performance of Model ABC and the Human Selection Model 
for the top-ranked schools 
Panel A. Test year 2017 
 
pub_top_5pct pub_top_10pct pub_top_20pct pub_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Prediction performance of the top-ranked schools   
Mean DV 6.21 9.66 21.38 43.45 
NDCG@K 27.54 20.88 45.90 62.38 
Precision@K 33.33 21.43 41.94 55.56 
LIFT 537.04 221.94 196.15 127.87 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 6.21 9.66 21.38 43.45 
NDCG@K 83.07 48.20 57.44 73.95 
Precision@K 77.78 35.71 48.39 69.84 
LIFT 1253.09 369.90 226.33 160.75 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
 
pub_top_5pct pub_top_10pct pub_top_20pct pub_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Prediction performance of top-ranked schools  
Mean DV 6.11 18.32 42.75 42.75 
NDCG@K 29.69 38.34 65.99 65.99 
Precision@K 37.50 29.17 62.50 62.50 
LIFT 614.06 159.20 146.21 146.21 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 6.11 18.32 42.75 42.75 
NDCG@K 57.27 48.94 60.13 59.04 
Precision@K 50.00 37.50 58.93 58.93 
LIFT 818.75 204.69 137.85 137.85 
 
Notes: This table compares the predictive performance of Model ABC against the realized selection outcomes for 
the top -ranked schools. For each cutoff K in a given test year, we first count the number of candidates with 
pub_top_Kpct = 1 and denote that number by N. We then identify the N candidates whose initial placements are 
at the highest -ranked institutions based on the combined U.S. News and QS rankings, and compute the 
corresponding performance metrics. Panel A reports test year 2017, and Panel B reports test year 2018. The results 
for Model ABC are copied from Table 3. Mean DV is the unconditional mean of the dependent variable in the test 
sample. NDCG@K, Precision@K, and LIFT are defined in Appendix C. 54 
 
Table 6. Comparing the prediction performance of Model ABC and Human Selection Model 
after excluding the top 10 business schools  
Panel A. Test year 2017 
 
pub_top_5pct pub_top_10pct pub_top_20pct pub_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Human Selection Model 
Mean DV 4.38 8.03 18.25 40.88 
NDCG@K 0.00 14.30 33.02 51.96 
Precision@K 0.00 18.18 28.00 51.79 
LIFT 0.00 226.45 153.44 126.69 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 4.38 8.03 18.25 40.88 
NDCG@K 75.26 36.89 50.67 71.48 
Precision@K 66.67 27.27 40.00 67.86 
LIFT 1522.22 339.67 219.20 166.01 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
 
pub_top_5pct pub_top_10pct pub_top_20pct pub_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Human Selection Model 
Mean DV 4.07 15.45 39.84 39.84 
NDCG 33.92 18.65 57.43 57.43 
Precision@K 20.00 10.53 55.10 55.10 
LIFT 492.00 68.14 138.32 138.32 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 4.07 15.45 39.84 39.84 
NDCG 48.52 35.64 53.97 52.50 
Precision@K 40.00 26.32 53.06 53.06 
LIFT 984.00 170.36 133.19 133.19 
 
Notes: This table compares the prediction performance of Model ABC and the Human Selection Model after 
excluding candidates initially placed at the top 10 U.S. business schools. The Human Selection Model uses the 
decile ranking of the candidate’s initial placement institution as the sole predictor for research productivity in the 
restricted sample. Panel A reports test year 2017 , and Panel B reports test year 2018. The reported results for 
Model ABC are based on the same prediction model as in Table 3, but all performance metrics are recalculated 
using the reduced test sample. Mean DV is the unconditional mean of the dependent variable in the restricted test 
sample. NDCG@K, Precision@K, and LIFT are defined in Appendix C.  55 
 
Table 7. Prediction performance of rookie candidates’ citation-weighted research productivity  
Panel A. Test year 2017 
Predictor Mean DV NDCG@K Precision@K LIFT 
Subpanel A: DV = pub_w_top_5pct 
A 4.83 22.91 28.57 591.84 
B 4.83 24.38 28.57 591.84 
C 4.83 29.18 28.57 591.84 
ABC 4.83 29.18 28.57 591.84 
Subpanel B: DV = pub_w_top_10pct 
A 9.66 42.95 28.57 295.92 
B 9.66 43.09 28.57 295.92 
C 9.66 23.81 28.57 295.92 
ABC 9.66 57.39 50.00 517.86 
Subpanel C: DV = pub_w_top_20pct 
A 20.00 44.21 37.93 189.66 
B 20.00 60.63 51.72 258.62 
C 20.00 47.38 48.28 241.38 
ABC 20.00 60.41 51.72 258.62 
Subpanel D: DV = pub_w_top_30pct 
A 29.66 58.98 53.49 180.37 
B 29.66 64.44 55.81 188.21 
C 29.66 47.00 48.84 164.68 
ABC 29.66 72.71 65.12 219.58 
 
 
  56 
 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
Predictor Mean DV NDCG@K Precision@K LIFT 
Subpanel A: DV = pub_w_top_5pct 
A 4.58 45.39 33.33 727.78 
B 4.58 41.97 33.33 727.78 
C 4.58 49.35 33.33 727.78 
ABC 4.58 64.48 50.00 1091.67 
Subpanel B: DV = pub_w_top_10pct 
A 9.92 24.73 23.08 232.54 
B 9.92 55.81 53.85 542.60 
C 9.92 36.38 30.77 310.06 
ABC 9.92 65.50 61.54 620.12 
Subpanel C: DV = pub_w_top_20pct 
A 20.61 36.86 29.63 143.76 
B 20.61 42.79 40.74 197.67 
C 20.61 44.70 37.04 179.70 
ABC 20.61 54.19 44.44 215.64 
Subpanel D: DV = pub_w_top_30pct 
A 29.77 36.48 33.33 111.97 
B 29.77 49.61 38.46 129.19 
C 29.77 45.64 41.03 137.80 
ABC 29.77 46.00 38.46 129.19 
 
Notes: This table reports the out -of-sample prediction performance of models that forecast rookie candidates’ 
citation-weighted research productivity. The dependent variables are pub_w_top_5pct, pub_w_top_10pct, 
pub_w_top_20pct, and pub_w_top_30pct, which are defined using candidates’ citation-weighted number of top-
journal publications over the five -year post -graduation window.  𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝_𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊ℎ𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖= 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖∗
𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖𝑟𝑟𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖𝑟𝑟𝐶𝐶𝑘𝑘
#𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑘𝑘𝑖𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑟 𝑟𝑟𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑟𝑟 𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑏𝑏ℎ
𝑘𝑘=1
, where 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑁𝑁_𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 is the number of top journal publications for candidate i , and 
𝐶𝐶𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡𝑊𝑊𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖 denotes the number of citations to all top -journal publications by candidate i . Panel A reports results 
for test year 2017,  and Panel B reports results for test year 2018. Mean DV is the unconditional mean of the 
dependent variable in the test sample. NDCG@K, Precision@K, and LIFT are defined in Appendix C. 
 
  57 
 
Table 8. Comparing the prediction performance of Model ABC and Human Selection Model for 
citation-weighted research productivity 
Panel A. Test year 2017 
 
pub_w_top_5pct pub_ w_top_10pct pub_ w_top_20pct pub_ w_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Human Selection Model 
Mean DV 4.83 9.66 20.00 29.66 
NDCG@K 35.81 37.10 43.79 54.10 
Precision@K 28.57 35.71 37.93 44.19 
LIFT 591.84 369.90 189.66 149.00 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 4.83 9.66 20.00 29.66 
NDCG@K 29.18 57.39 60.41 72.71 
Precision@K 28.57 50.00 51.72 65.12 
LIFT 591.84 517.86 258.62 219.58 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
 
pub_ w_top_5pct pub_ w_top_10pct pub_ w_top_20pct pub_ w_top_30pct 
Subpanel A: Human Selection Model 
Mean DV 4.58 9.92 20.61 29.77 
NDCG@K 41.58 37.50 46.81 54.85 
Precision@K 50.00 38.46 33.33 46.15 
LIFT 1091.67 387.57 161.73 155.03 
Subpanel B: Model ABC 
Mean DV 4.58 9.92 20.61 29.77 
NDCG@K 64.48 65.50 54.19 46.00 
Precision@K 50.00 61.54 44.44 38.46 
LIFT 1091.67 620.12 215.64 129.19 
 
Notes: This table compares the out -of-sample prediction performance of Model ABC and the Human Selection 
Model using citation -weighted research productivity as the outcome variable. The dependent variables are 
pub_w_top_5pct, pub_w_top_10pct, pub_w_top_20pct, and pub_w_top_30pct. The Human Selection Model uses 
the decile ranking of the candidate’s initial placement institution as the sole predictor. Panel A reports test year 
2017, and Panel B reports test year 2018. The results for Model ABC are copied  from Table 7. Mean DV is the 
unconditional mean of the dependent variable in the test sample. NDCG@K, Precision@K, and LIFT are defined 
in Appendix C.   58 
 
Table 9. The 10 most important features in Model ABC and the Initial Placement Model 
Panel A. Test year 2017 
 Subpanel A: pub_top_5pct and job_top_5pct 
 pub_top_5
pct model 
sign of 
pub_top_5pct 
model 
job_top_5
pct model 
sign of 
job_top_5pct 
model 
Difference 
in ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
number of awards 1 + 9 + -8 Yes 
reference_high 2 - 89 + -87 No 
number of top R&R 
papers 3 + 168 + -165 Yes 
number of 
reviewers 4 + 48 + -44 Yes 
coauthor_mean 5 - 248 + -243 No 
number of 
coauthors 6 + 38 - -32 No 
number of 
membership 7 - 19 - -12 Yes 
reference_mean 8 + 11 + -3 Yes 
number of teaching 
experiences 9 - 26 + -17 No 
number of R&R 
papers 10 + 18 - -8 No 
number of 
published papers 13 + 7 + 6 Yes 
reference_first 14 - 1 - 13 Yes 
PhD_top 17 + 4 + 13 Yes 
PrimaryResearchAr
ea_financial 20 + 6 + 14 Yes 
coauthor_high 58 + 5 - 53 No 
number_of_coautho
r_2degree 65 + 2 - 63 No 
had non-academic 
work 88 - 8 + 80 No 
number of 
presentations 110 - 10 + 100 No 
Master_top 133 - 3 + 130 No 
 Subpanel B: pub_top_10pct and job_top_10pct 
 pub_top_1
0pct 
model 
sign of 
pub_top_10pc
t model 
job_top_1
0pct 
model 
sign of 
job_top_10pc
t model 
Difference 
in ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
number of awards 1 + 8 + -7 Yes 
reference_first 2 - 1 - 1 Yes 
number of 
coauthors 3 + 46 - -43 No 
number of 
membership 4 - 3 - 1 Yes 
reference_high 5 - 16 + -11 No 59 
 
PhD_top 6 + 18 + -12 Yes 
number of 
reviewers 7 + 25 + -18 Yes 
number of teaching 
experiences 8 + 10 + -2 Yes 
reference_mean 9 + 5 + 4 Yes 
number of top R&R 
papers 10 + 100 - -90 No 
number of 
presentations 12 - 6 + 6 No 
coauthor_high 13 - 2 - 11 Yes 
number of 
presentations at top 
conferences 18 - 4 + 14 No 
number of papers in 
progress 31 + 7 + 24 Yes 
PrimaryResearchAr
ea_financial 276 - 9 + 267 No 
 Subpanel C: pub_top_20pct and job_top_20pct 
 pub_top_2
0pct 
model 
sign of 
pub_top_20pc
t model 
job_top_2
0pct 
model 
sign of 
job_top_20pc
t model 
Difference 
in ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
number of 
coauthors 1 + 12 + -11 Yes 
number of 
membership 2 - 5 - -3 Yes 
reference_first 3 - 14 - -11 Yes 
PhD_top 4 + 3 + 1 Yes 
number of teaching 
experiences 5 + 4 + 1 Yes 
coauthor_high 6 - 15 - -9 Yes 
coauthor_top 7 - 13 - -6 Yes 
number of 
reviewers 8 + 260 - -252 No 
reference_high 9 - 7 + 2 No 
number of working 
experiences 10 - 6 + 4 No 
number of awards 13 + 2 + 11 Yes 
reference_mean 32 + 8 - 24 No 
Bachelor_top 50 + 9 + 41 Yes 
number of 
presentations at top 
conferences 76 + 10 + 66 Yes 
number of 
presentations 85 - 1 + 84 No 
 Subpanel D: pub_top_30pct and job_top_30pct 
 pub_top_
30pct 
model 
sign of 
pub_top_30p
ct model 
job_top_3
0pct 
model 
sign of 
job_top_30p
ct model 
Differenc
e in 
ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 60 
 
number of 
coauthors 1 + 9 + -8 Yes 
number of 
membership 2 - 6 - -4 Yes 
reference_first 3 - 4 - -1 Yes 
PhD_top 4 + 31 + -27 Yes 
number_of_coautho
r_2degree 5 - 10 + -5 No 
number of top R&R 
papers 6 + 294 + -288 Yes 
Master_top 7 + 251 + -244 Yes 
coauthor_top 8 - 100 - -92 Yes 
coauthor_high 9 - 13 - -4 Yes 
number of 
presentations 10 + 5 + 5 Yes 
number of awards 12 + 2 + 10 Yes 
reference_high 14 - 1 - 13 Yes 
reference_mean 15 + 3 + 12 Yes 
coauthor_mean 16 + 8 + 8 Yes 
number of teaching 
experiences 40 + 7 + 33 Yes 
 
Panel B. Test year 2018 
 Subpanel A: pub_top_5pct and job_top_5pct 
 pub_top_5
pct model 
sign of 
pub_top_5pct 
model 
job_top_5
pct model 
sign of 
job_top_5pct 
model 
Differenc
e in 
ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
reference_high 1 - 1 - 0 Yes 
number of awards 2 + 23 + -21 Yes 
number of reviewers 3 + 18 + -15 Yes 
number of coauthors 4 + 39 - -35 No 
reference_mean 5 + 13 + -8 Yes 
reference_first 6 - 248 - -242 Yes 
number of 
membership 7 - 5 - 2 Yes 
number of teaching 
experiences 8 - 3 - 5 Yes 
number of top 
published papers 9 + 2 + 7 Yes 
number of top R&R 
papers 10 + 15 + -5 Yes 
number of 
presentations 11 + 4 + 7 Yes 
number of published 
papers 12 + 7 + 5 Yes 
number_of_coauthor
_2degree 14 + 6 - 8 No 
PrimaryResearchAr
ea_financial 21 + 8 + 13 Yes 61 
 
PrimaryResearchMe
thod_experiment 264 - 9 - 255 Yes 
had non-academic 
work 
291 + 10 + 281 Yes 
 Subpanel B: pub_top_10pct and job_top_10pct 
 pub_top_1
0pct 
model 
sign of 
pub_top_10pc
t model 
job_top_1
0pct 
model 
sign of 
job_top_10pc
t model 
Differenc
e in 
ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
reference_first 1 - 18 - -17 Yes 
number of awards 2 + 3 + -1 Yes 
number of coauthors 3 + 10 + -7 Yes 
number of 
membership 4 - 4 - 0 Yes 
number of reviewers 5 + 16 + -11 Yes 
coauthor_high 6 - 11 - -5 Yes 
number of top 
published papers 7 + 8 + -1 Yes 
reference_high 8 - 1 - 7 Yes 
number of top R&R 
papers 9 + 13 + -4 Yes 
reference_mean 10 + 7 + 3 Yes 
PhD_top 12 + 5 + 7 Yes 
number_of_coauthor
_2degree 13 + 9 - 4 No 
number of working 
experiences 15 - 6 + 9 No 
number of 
presentations 18 + 2 + 16 Yes 
 Subpanel C: pub_top_20pct and job_top_20pct 
 pub_top_2
0pct 
model 
sign of 
pub_top_20pc
t model 
job_top_2
0pct 
model 
sign of 
job_top_20pc
t model 
Differenc
e in 
ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
number of coauthors 1 + 16 + -15 Yes 
number of 
presentations 2 + 1 + 1 Yes 
PhD_top 3 + 3 + 0 Yes 
reference_first 4 - 4 - 0 Yes 
coauthor_high 5 - 13 - -8 Yes 
number of 
membership 6 - 6 - 0 Yes 
coauthor_mean 7 + 7 + 0 Yes 
number of teaching 
experiences 8 + 54 + -46 Yes 
number of reviewers 9 + 19 + -10 Yes 
number of awards 10 + 2 + 8 Yes 
number of top 
published papers 12 + 9 + 3 Yes 
number of 
presentations at top 
conferences 15 - 10 + 5 No 62 
 
reference_mean 18 - 8 - 10 Yes 
number of working 
experiences 159 - 5 + 154 No 
 Subpanel D: pub_top_30pct and job_top_30pct 
 pub_top_3
0pct 
model 
sign of 
pub_top_30pc
t model 
job_top_3
0pct 
model 
sign of 
job_top_30pc
t model 
Differenc
e in 
ranking 
Sam
e 
sign 
number of coauthors 1 + 36 + -35 Yes 
reference_first 2 - 22 + -20 No 
number of 
membership 3 - 3 - 0 Yes 
coauthor_high 4 - 55 - -51 Yes 
PhD_top 5 + 1 + 4 Yes 
coauthor_mean 6 + 222 - -216 No 
number of 
presentations 7 + 11 + -4 Yes 
number of awards 8 + 4 + 4 Yes 
Master_top 9 + 182 - -173 No 
number of top R&R 
papers 10 + 18 + -8 Yes 
number of reviewers 12 + 10 + 2 Yes 
number of top 
published papers 16 + 5 + 11 Yes 
number_of_coauthor
_2degree 18 - 6 - 12 Yes 
gender 23 + 7 + 16 Yes 
reference_high 26 - 2 - 24 Yes 
number of published 
papers 29 + 9 + 20 Yes 
has Bachelor honor 271 - 8 + 263 No 
Notes: This table reports the 10 most important input variables, ranked by the magnitude of SHAP values, for 
Model ABC and the Initial Placement Model in the test-year samples. Panel A reports test year 2017, and Panel B 
reports test year 2018. For each dependent variable, rank 1 denotes the most important feature. The sign reported 
for each feature is determined in two steps. First, we regress the SHAP value of the feature on the corresponding 
feature value in the test sample. Then, we assign the sign of the estimated coefficient from that regression. If the 
absolute value of the estimated coefficient is smaller than 1% of the unconditional mean of the predicted dependent 
variable, we treat the feature as having no meaningful economic effect and assign a value of zero.  63 
 
Table 10. Comparing SHARE_UNADJ and SHARE_ADJ of ML Selected Group and Human 
Hired Group 
Test year SHARE_UNADJ SHARE_ADJ 
Panel A: Human Hired Group 
2017 17.19% 18.55% 
2018 22.77% 24.96% 
Panel B: ML Selected Group 
2017 31.25% 30.58% 
2018 25.74% 30.05% 
Notes: This table compares the publication shares of the Human Hired Group and the ML Selected Group. The 
Human Hired Group comprises  candidates hired by the top 10 U.S. business schools in each test year. The ML 
Selected Group consists of the same number of candidates, selected according to the highest predicted 
probabilities from Model ABC using the pub_top_5pct specification. SHARE_UNADJ  is the share of top-journal 
publications produced by the selected group relative to all candidates in the same cohort during the five-year post-
graduation window. SHARE_ADJ is the corresponding share based on citation-weighted publications.
  64 
 
Table 11. OLS regression results of gap_Kpct_prob on rookie candidates’ characteristics (test 
years 2017 and 2018 combined) 
Panel A. Descriptive statistics of 𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈_𝑲𝑲𝒈𝒈𝑲𝑲𝑲𝑲_𝒈𝒈𝒑𝒑𝒑𝒑𝒑𝒑 
 
K=5 K=10 K=20 K=30 
count 276 276 276 276 
mean 0.056 0.011 -0.017 -0.009 
std 0.153 0.086 0.078 0.088 
min -0.496 -0.255 -0.271 -0.269 
25% -0.039 -0.049 -0.062 -0.073 
50% 0.044 0.026 -0.010 -0.014 
75% 0.133 0.076 0.035 0.054 
max 0.557 0.201 0.186 0.187 
 
Panel B. OLS regression results and t stats in parenthesis 
 
 K=5 K=10 K=20 K=30 
gender -0.0359* -0.0090 0.0097 -0.0040 
 (-1.92) (-0.86) (1.09) (-0.39) 
second_language_asia -0.0167 -0.0036 0.0051 0.0014 
 (-0.48) (-0.19) (0.31) (0.08) 
second_language_euro -0.0260 -0.0107 -0.0291** -0.0551*** 
 (-0.94) (-0.69) (-2.20) (-3.66) 
PhD_top10 -0.0373 -0.0281* -0.0250* -0.0261 
 (-1.22) (-1.64) (-1.71) (-1.58) 
reference_top 0.0015 0.0174* 0.0492*** 0.0403*** 
 (0.08) (1.66) (5.56) (4.00) 
 
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics and OLS regression results for gap_Kpct_prob using the pooled 
test-year sample from 2017 and 2018.  gap_Kpct_prob is defined as the predicted probability of pub_top_Kpct 
from Model ABC minus the predicted probability of job_top_Kpct  from the Initial Placement Model. The Initial 
Placement Model uses the same predictor sets A, B, and C as Model ABC  but predicts the likelihood that the 
candidate’s initial placement institution ranks in the top K percent. Panel A reports descriptive statistics. Panel B 
reports OLS coefficient estimates, with t- statistics in parentheses. gender  equals one if the applicant is male and 
zero otherwise. second_language_asia equals one if the applicant reports proficiency in an Asian language other 
than English, and zero otherwise. second_language_euro  equals one if the applicant reports proficiency in a 
European language other than English, and zero otherwise. PhD_top10 equals one if the applicant received the 
PhD from a top-10 business school, and zero otherwise. reference_top equals one if the applicant’s first reference 
is ranked in the top 10 percent of the BYU individual ranking in that year, and zero otherwise.  65 
 
Appendix A. Variable definitions 
variable name data source definition 
Panel A: dependent variables 
pub_top_5pct hand-collect 
The dummy indicating whether the candidate ’s 
number of publications on the top 11 journals 
(listed in the data source section ) during the 5 
years starting from the batch year (e.g., 
2018.1~2022.12 for the 2017/2018 batch) is 
among the top 5% of his/her peers who apply to 
the Miami Camp in the same year 
pub_top_10pct hand-collect 
The dummy indicating whether the candidate ’s 
number of publications on the top 11 journals 
(listed in the data source section ) during the 5 
years starting from the batch year (e.g., 
2018.1~2022.12 for the 2017/2018 batch) is 
among the top 10% of his/her peers who apply to 
the Miami Camp in the same year 
pub_top_20pct hand-collect 
The dummy indicating whether the candidate ’s 
number of publications on the top 11 journals 
(listed in the data source section ) during the 5 
years starting from the batch year (e.g., 
2018.1~2022.12 for the 2017/2018 batch) is 
among the top 20% of his/her peers who apply to 
the Miami Camp in the same year 
pub_top_30pct hand-collect 
The dummy indicating whether the candidate ’s 
number of publications on the top 11 journals 
(listed in the data source section ) during the 5 
years starting from the batch year (e.g., 
2018.1~2022.12 for the 2017/2018 batch) is 
among the top 30% of his/her peers who apply to 
the Miami Camp in the same year 
job_top_5pct hand-collect; US 
News; QS 
The dummy indicates whether the candidate ’s 
first placement university is among the top 5% of 
his/her peers who apply to the Miami Camp in the 
same year. The university rank is the combined 
historical rank from U.S. News and QS World 
University Rankings. 
job_top_10pct hand-collect; US 
News; QS 
The dummy indicates whether the candidate ’s 
first placement university is among the top 10% 
of his/her peers who apply to the Miami Camp in 
the same year. The university rank is the 
combined historical rank from U.S. News and QS 
World University Rankings. 
job_top_20pct hand-collect; US 
News; QS 
The dummy indicates whether the candidate ’s 
first placement university is among the top 20% 
of his/her peers who apply to the Miami Camp in 
the same year. The university rank is the 
combined historical rank from U.S. News and QS 
World University Rankings. 
job_top_30pct hand-collect; US 
News; QS 
The dummy indicates whether the candidate ’s 
first placement university ranks  among the top 
30% of his/her peers who apply to the Miami 
Camp in the same year. The university rank is the 
combined historical rank from U.S. News and QS 
World University Rankings. 66 
 
   
Panel B: variables extracted directly from the CV without background knowledge (Predictors A) 
gender CV 1 for male, 0 for female 
has Bachelor honor CV 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate listed 
any honors obtained during the Bachelor's  stage 
in the CV 
has Master honor CV 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate listed 
any honors obtained during the Master's stage in 
the CV 
has PhD honor CV 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate listed 
any honors obtained during the Ph.D. stage in the 
CV 
number of published papers CV The total number of published papers listed in the 
CV 
number of R&R papers CV The total number of papers that got an R&R listed 
in the CV 
number of papers in progress CV The total number of papers in progress listed in 
the CV 
has_coauthor CV The dummy indicating whether the candidate 
mentioned any coauthor in the CV 
has_reference CV The dummy indicates whether the candidate 
mentioned any reference in the CV 
number of coauthors CV The number of coauthors mentioned in the CV 
number of presentations CV The total number of conference or workshop 
presentations listed in the candidate's CV 
number of teaching experiences CV The total number of teaching experiences listed 
in the CV 
number of awards CV The total number of academic awards listed in the 
CV 
number of reviewers CV The number of journals or associations where the 
candidate serves as a reviewer listed in the CV 
number of membership CV The number of memberships listed in the CV 
number of working experiences CV The number of working experiences listed in the 
CV 
had academic work CV 
The dummy indicates whether the candidate had 
academic employment experience mentioned in 
the CV 
had non-academic work CV 
The dummy indicates whether the candidate had 
non-academic working experience mentioned in 
the CV 
provide abstract CV The dummy indicates whether the candidate 
presents abstracts of any papers in the CV 
PrimaryResearchArea_financial CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research area is financial accounting 
PrimaryResearchArea_auditing CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research area is auditing 
PrimaryResearchArea_tax CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research area is tax  
PrimaryResearchArea_managerial CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research area is managerial accounting  
PrimaryResearchMethod_archival CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research method is archival empirical methods 67 
 
PrimaryResearchMethod_experim
ental CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research method is experimental methods 
PrimaryResearchMethod_analytic
al CV A dummy indicating that the candidate’s primary 
research method is analytical methods 
multi_language CV A dummy indicating that the candidate speaks 
more than one language 
   
Panel C: variables extracted from CV combined with background knowledge  (Predictors B) 
bachelor_top CV; US News 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate 
earned a bachelor’s degree from one of the top 50 
business schools in the US. The university name 
is from the “ Bachelor's degree” item output by 
GPT. The rank is the historical university rank 
from US News.  
master_top CV; US News 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate 
earned a master ’s degree from one of the top 50 
business schools in the US. The university name 
is from the “ Master’s degree ” item output by 
GPT. The rank is the historical university rank 
from US News. 
phd_top CV; US News 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate 
earned the PhD degree from one of the top 50 
business schools in the US. The university name 
is from the “PhD degree ” item output by GPT. 
The rank is the historical university rank from US 
News. 
visit_top CV; US News 
A dummy indicating whether the candidate has 
ever visited the top 50 business schools in the US. 
The university names are from the “visiting 
experience” item output by GPT. The rank is the 
historical university rank from US News. 
number of top published papers CV; field 
knowledge 
The total number of papers that are listed in the 
CV and published in the 11 top journals (listed in 
the data source section ). The journal names are 
from the “published journal list” by GPT.  
number of top R&R papers CV; field 
knowledge 
The total number of papers that are listed in the 
CV and received  an R&R in the 11 top journals 
(listed in the data source section ). The journal 
names are from the “R&R journal list” by GPT. 
coauthor_mean CV; BYU 
The average rank of all the coauthors mentioned 
in the CV. The rank is from the historical 
individual rank from the BYU website in the year 
prior to the candidate’s batch year. The coauthor 
names are from the “coauthor list” item by GPT. 
If no coauthor is mentioned, fill 0.11 
coauthor_high CV; BYU 
The highest rank of all the coauthors mentioned 
in the CV. The rank is from the historical 
individual rank from the BYU website in the year 
prior to the candidate’s batch year. The coauthor 
names are from the “coauthor list” item by GPT. 
If no coauthor is mentioned, fill 0. 
 
11 We define a variable has_coauthor to identify the missing cases. 68 
 
number_of_coauthor_2nd_degree
12 CV; BYU 
The total number of coauthors of all the coauthors 
mentioned in the CV. The coauthors of each 
coauthor are from the BYU website page for each 
individual accounting scholar. If the coauthor 
does not have a page on the BYU website, we 
assume the coauthor is not well known and do not 
count them . The coauthor names are from the 
“coauthor list” item by GPT. 
coauthor_top CV; BYU 
A dummy of whether any one of the candidate ’s 
coauthors mentioned in the CV is a top scholar 
(top scholar is defined as the scholar ranked in the 
top 1% on the BYU website in the application 
year). The coauthor names are from the “coauthor 
list” item by GPT. 
number of top conference 
presentation 
CV; field 
knowledge 
The total number of presentations at top 
accounting conferences, including the American 
Accounting Association (AAA) annual 
conference, the Journal of Accounting and 
Economics (JAE) conference, the Contemporary 
Accounting Research (CAR) conference, the 
Journal of Accounting Research (JAR) 
conference, Review of Accounting Studies 
(RAS) conference, Financial Accounting and 
Reporting Midyear meeting, Managerial 
Accounting Midyear Meeting, Journal of the 
American Taxation Association (JATA) 
conference. 
reference_first CV; BYU 
The rank of the first name in the reference list in 
the year prior to the candidate ’s batch year. The 
rank is the historical individual rank from the 
BYU website. The reference names are from the 
“references” item by GPT. If no reference name 
is mentioned, fill 0.13 
reference_mean CV; BYU 
The average rank of the reference names in the 
year prior to the candidate’s batch year. The rank 
is the historical individual rank from the BYU 
website. The reference names are from the 
“references” item by GPT.  If no reference name 
is mentioned, fill 0. 
reference_high CV; BYU 
The highest rank of the reference names in the 
year prior to the candidate’s batch year. The rank 
is the historical individual rank from the BYU 
website. The reference names are from the 
 
12 number_of_coauthor, number_of_coauthor_2nd_degree, and coauthor ranks (i.e., coauthor_top, 
coauthor_high, coauthor_mean) are all network related variables. Ductor et al. (2014) also include measures such 
as “closeness centrality” and “betweenness centrality”. We didn’t include these measures for two reasons: 1. Their 
work focuses on all economic scholars, but we only focus on rookies. Rookies usually do not form very complex 
coauthorship networks, so these measures are highly correlated with existing variables. They may not add much 
incremental information.  2. Their work constructs a network from EconLit. Our coauthorship data come from 
individual CVs and the BYU website, which includes only prestigious scholars. So our network is  incomplete, 
making these measures inaccurate and less relevant.    
13 We define a variable has_reference to identify the missing cases.  69 
 
“references” item by GPT.  If no reference name 
is mentioned, fill 0. 
second_language_Asia CV; knowledge 
A dummy indicating that the candidate speaks a 
second language besides English and that the 
language is from an Asian country.  
second_language_Euro CV; knowledge 
A dummy indicating that the candidate speaks a 
second language besides English and that the 
language is from a European country.   
   
Panel D: embeddings from the dissertation by Text-Embedding-3-Large (Predictors C) 
1_dt ~ 256_dt dissertation 
256 variables obtained by applying Text -
Embedding-3-Large to the dissertations ’ title, 
abstract, and introduction section , and only 
keeping the first 256 numbers of the embeddings. 
   
Panel E: initial placement rank 
Placerank 
US News; QS 
University 
Rankings 
This is the rank of the candidate's first placement 
institution. Each year, we first identify the top 80 
schools based on the combined rankings from 
U.S. News and QS. Then we rank the placement 
schools of rookies. In each year, for the samples 
that get jobs at the top 80 schools, we group them 
into deciles by rank and define the Place_rank 
variable as 1-10, where 1 denotes the top schools. 
For the samples that don’t have a job on the top 
80 schools, their Place_rank variable is set to 11. 
 
 
  70 
 
Appendix B. The IPW procedure 
 We implement the inverse probability weighting (IPW) procedure following Swaminathan and 
Joachims (2015) and Schnabel et al. (2016). Because the method requires a dichotomous treatment 
indicator, we classify initial placement institutions as either research-oriented or non-research-oriented. 
We assume that institutions within each category are relatively homogeneous in research intensity. 
 We determine research orientation using region -specific classification systems to ensure 
comparability across countries. For institutions located in the United States, we rely on the Carnegie 
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. Specifically, we designate an institution as research-
oriented if it qualifies as a Research 1 (R1) university, defined as spending at least USD 50 million on 
research and development (R&D) and awarding at least 70 research doctorates annually. 
 For institutions located in Europe, we use the European Tertiary Education Register (ETER), 
which provides standardized institution- level information on doctoral education and research 
expenditures. To maintain consistency with the U.S. Carnegie criteria, we classify a European 
institution as research-oriented if it awards more than 70 doctoral degrees per year and reports annual 
R&D expenditures exceeding USD 50 million. 
 For institutions outside the United States and Europe, we identify research-oriented universities 
using widely recognized national classifications of research-intensive institutions. In mainland China, 
we classify “985” universities and “211/Double First Class” universities as research -oriented. In 
Taiwan, we classify National Taiwan University as research-oriented. In South Korea, we include Seoul 
National University, KAIST, POSTECH, SKKU, Yonsei University, and Korea University. In 71 
 
Australia, we include the Group of Eight (Go8) universities. In Singapore, we include NUS, NTU, and 
SMU. In Hong Kong, we classify the five leading research universities —HKU, CUHK, HKUST, 
PolyU, and CityU —as research -oriented. In Canada, we include the U15  Research Universities. All 
remaining institutions in our sample are classified as non-research-oriented. 
 We next estimate a logit model of a candidate’s initial placement type. The dependent variable, 𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖, 
is an indicator equal to one if the candidate’s initial placement institution is classified as research -oriented 
and zero otherwise. We model 𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖as a function of the predictor set used in the machine learning model. For 
instance, if the machine learning model uses predictor set ABC, we also use ABC in the logit model. 
The model is estimated separately for each test year using the corresponding training sample. The 
logit specification is as follows: 
Pr(𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖= 1|𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖) = 𝑊𝑊(𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖; 𝛾𝛾) 
To ensure that the IPW procedure is well behaved, we first examine the empirical distribution 
of the estimated propensity scores, 𝑊𝑊̂(𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖), and trim observations with 𝑊𝑊̂(𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖) outside the interval ([0.05, 
0.95]) (Crump, Hotz, Imbens, and Mitnik 2009; Austin and Stuart 2015) . Candidates with extreme 
propensity scores are effectively deterministically assigned to one institutional type, conditional on 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖, 
and their inclusion would produce excessively large weights and increase the estimator's variance. 
As a diagnostic, we evaluate common support and covariate balance by comparing standardized 
mean differences in the primary predictors 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖 between research- and non-research-oriented institutions, 
both before and after applying the IPW weights. We consider the IPW adjustment successful if the 
absolute standardized differences decline substantially after weighting, indicating improved balance 72 
 
across treatment groups.  We find that IPW adjustment improves overall covariate balance across 
treatment groups (untabulated). 
Next, we use the estimated propensity scores to construct stabilized inverse probability weights 
that generate a pseudo-population in which institutional type is independent of candidate characteristics, 
conditional on 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖 . Let 𝑝𝑝̂=
1
𝑁𝑁∑ 𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖 𝑖𝑖denote the empirical fraction of candidates placed at research -
oriented institutions in the training sample for a given test year. For each candidate 𝑊𝑊, w
e define the 
stabilized weight following Hernán and Robins (
2020) as follows: 
𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖= 𝑝𝑝̂
𝑊𝑊̂(𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖) 𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖+ 1 − 𝑝𝑝̂
1 − 𝑊𝑊̂(𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖) (1 − 𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖) 
Intuitively, candidates whose realized institutional type is unlikely given their observed 
characteristics— for example, high-potential candidates placed at non-research-oriented institutions or 
lower-potential candidates placed at research -oriented institu tions— receive larger weights. These 
observations are particularly informative about how research productivity varies with 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖  when the 
assignment to institutional type is less strongly aligned with observable characteristics.  To further 
reduce the influence of extreme weights, we truncate 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖 at the 5th and 95th percentiles of its empirical 
distribution. Finally, we re -estimate our research productivity prediction models using the stabilized 
IPW weights. 73 
 
Appendix C. Prediction performance metrics 
metrics definition 
Mean DV The unconditional mean of the dependent variable 
NDCG@K Normalized Discounted Cumulated Gain at the position K. K is equal to the 
unconditional mean of the dependent variable in the test set  
Precision@K The percentage of candidates among the top 𝐾𝐾 ranked by predicted probabilities in 
a given test year whose actual research productivity falls within the top 𝐾𝐾 of 
candidates in the test year 
LIFT Precision@K as a percentage of Mean DV , representing the accuracy of a prediction 
model relative to a random classification benchmark 74 
 
Online appendix 
 
  75 
 
Table OA1. Prompting Using GPT-4 
  
As a recruitment member of the accounting department of a university. Your task is to process the CV texts of 
candidates, extract the information I want to structural output. Here is the list of the information I want from their CVs.  
1. Name 
2. Education experience 
3. Employment experience 
4. Research interest 
5. Publication 
6. Working paper 
7. Conference presentation 
8. Teaching experience 
9. Awards 
10. Professional service and membership 
11. Reference 
12. Language 
Present your findings as a single JSON object, conforming to the following structure:  
```{ 
 "name": "name of the candidate", 
 "Bachelor degree": "the name of the university where the candidate got the bachelor degree (Do not include the 
country. Do not include the school name or department name, just the name of the university.)",  
 "has Bachelor honor": 1 if the candidate has an honor in bachelor stage, 0 otherwise,  
 "Master degree":  "the name of the university where the candidate got the master degree (do not include the country. 
Do not include the school name or department name, just the name of the university.)", 
 "has Master honor": 1 if the candidate has an honor in Master stage, 0 otherwise,  
 "PhD degree": "the name of the university where the candidate will get the PhD degree (do not include the country. 
Do not include the school name or department name, just the name of the university.)",  
 "has PhD honor": 1 if the candidate has an honor (e.g., Summa Cum Laude) in PhD stage, 0 otherwise,  
 "visiting experience": the list of universities (note: not school names) the candidate visited as a visiting PhD or 
visiting scholar(do not include the country), in the form of a list ["university 1","university 2",...], 
 “research interest”: the text describing the research interests of the candidate,  
 "papers": the list of paper including the following attributes: title,coauthor (if no coauthor, say "solo"), journal (if not 
under review, leave this blank), status (including under review, revise and resubmit(R&R), published), 
 "number of published papers": the number of published papers, 0 if no publication, 
 "published journal list": the list of the journals if the candidate has published papers like ["journal 1", "journal 2"], 
blank list if no publication, 
 "number of R&R papers": the number of papers that get revise and resubmit (R&R) by journals (note that under 
review is not R&R), 
 "R&R journal list": the list of the journals gave an R&R to the candidate like ["journal 1", "journal 2"], 
 "number of papers in progress": the number of papers that are not published or get an R&R, 
 "coauthor list": the list of all the coauthors of all the papers of the candidate like ["coauthor 1","coauther 2",...], 
 “number of coauthors”: the number of coauthors of all the papers mentioned in this CV,  
 "conference presentation": the list of conferences the candidate participated (including academic conferences and 
workshops), 
 "number of presentations": the total number of presentations, including academic conferences, workshops, etc. 
 "number of presentations at top conferences": the total number of presentations at top conferences, including
 
American Accounting Association (AAA) annual conference, Journal of Accounting and Economics (JAE) conference,  
Contemporary Accounting Research (CAR) conference, Journal of Accounting Research (JAR) conference, Review of 
Accounting Studies (RAS) conference, Financial Accounting and Reporting Midyear meeting, Managerial Accounting 
Midyear Meeting, Journal of the American Taxation Association (JATA) conference.  
 "Teaching experiences": the list of teaching experiences in the form of ["experience 1","experience 2",......],  
 "number of teaching experiences": the number of teaching experiences, 
 "academic awards": the list of academic awards, 
 “number of awards”: the number of academic awards,  
 "reviewer": the list of journals or associations where the candidate serves as ad hoc reviewer, 
 “number of reviewers”: the number of journals or associations where the candidate serves as ad hoc reviewer, 
 "membership": the associations that the candidate join as a member, 
 “number of membership”: the number of associations that the candidate join as a member, 
 "number of working experiences": the number of working experiences, 
 "had academic work": 1 if the candidate has worked in academic institutions, 0 otherwise, 
 "had non-academic work": 1 if the candidate has worked outside academic institutions, 0 otherwise, 
 "references": the list of names of the references like ["name 1","name 2"] (remove the titles like professor, prof, Dr, 
etc.), 
 "provide abstract": 1 if the candidate presents the abstracts of the papers in the CV file, 0 otherwise, 
 "abstract list": the list of the abstracts in the form of ["abstract 1", "abstract 2",......]  
 “language list”: the list of languages that the candidate speak in the form of [“language 1”,”language 2”,…], blank if 
not mentioned.  
}``` 
If any of the above information is not mentioned in the CV profile, just fill the item with a blank. Your output should 
be a single valid JSON object and should not contain any additional or explanatory text. Here is the text of the candidate CV:  
 76 
 
Assessing the accuracy of GPT’s feature extraction from resumes 
To evaluate the accuracy of GPT in converting resumes into structured variables, we randomly 
selected 20 samples from all CV files and tasked a research assistant (RA) with manually extracting 
attributes from these CVs using the same prompting format shown  in Table OA1. We then compared 
the numeric predictors derived from GPT to those extracted by the RA. Table OA2 summarizes the 
discrepancies between GPT ’s outputs and the RA ’s results, including the number of mismatched 
samples and the mean absolute error (MAE) for each variable. 
Of the 17 variables analyzed, GPT achieved perfect extraction accuracy for six and made fewer 
than ten errors for an additional nine. Only two variables —the number of papers in progress and the 
number of presentations —had error rates exceeding 50%. These inaccuracies likely reflect 
inconsistencies and lack of transparency in how applicants disclose this information, which complicates 
accurate extraction. Despite these discrepancies, the mean absolute errors are general ly small and 
statistically insignificant for most predictors, indicating that GPT's extraction performance is acceptable 
for the majority of variables. 
 
  77 
 
Table OA2. Accuracy of 20 randomly selected samples: comparing GPT with human RAs 
  #(GPT≠RA) Mean Absolute Error 
has Bachelor honor 0 0 
has Master honor 0 0 
has PhD honor 0 0 
had non-academic work 0 0 
provide abstract 0 0 
multi_language 0 0 
number of R&R papers 2 0.10 
number of published papers 3 0.35 
number of membership 3 0.25 
number of reviewers 4 0.50 
number of awards 6 0.50 
number of coauthors 7 0.65 
number of working experiences 7 0.55 
number of teaching experiences 8 1.20 
had academic work 9 0.45 
number of papers in progress 12 1.35 
number of presentations 12 3.10 
 
Notes: This table compares the structured variables extracted by GPT with those manually extracted by a research 
assistant from 20 randomly selected CVs. The first column reports the number of cases in which the GPT 
extraction differs from the research ass istant’s extraction. The second column reports the mean absolute error 
between the two extraction methods. See Appendix A for variable definitions. 
 
  78 
 
Table OA3. Prediction performance of the Initial Placement Model  
Panel A: test year 2017 
Predictor Mean DV NDCG@K Precision@K LIFT 
Subpanel A: DV = job_top_5pct 
A 4.83 11.84 14.29 295.92 
B 4.83 0.00 0.00 0.00 
C 4.83 0.00 0.00 0.00 
ABC 4.83 11.84 14.29 295.92 
Subpanel B: DV = job_top_10pct 
A 7.59 13.15 18.18 239.67 
B 7.59 10.37 9.09 119.83 
C 7.59 22.31 27.27 359.50 
ABC 7.59 8.93 9.09 119.83 
Subpanel C: DV = job_top_20pct 
A 17.24 23.67 24.00 139.20 
B 17.24 31.59 32.00 185.60 
C 17.24 55.65 56.00 324.80 
ABC 17.24 38.06 32.00 185.60 
Subpanel D: DV = job_top_30pct 
A 28.97 33.34 35.71 123.30 
B 28.97 29.29 26.19 90.42 
C 28.97 48.38 38.10 131.52 
ABC 28.97 40.43 35.71 123.30 
 
  79 
 
Panel B: test year 2018 
Predictor Mean DV NDCG@K Precision@K LIFT 
Subpanel A: DV = job_top_5pct 
A 3.82 0.00 0.00 0.00 
B 3.82 36.01 40.00 1048.00 
C 3.82 0.00 0.00 0.00 
ABC 3.82 69.92 60.00 1572.00 
Subpanel B: DV = job_top_10pct 
A 8.40 20.74 9.09 108.26 
B 8.40 36.95 36.36 433.06 
C 8.40 25.32 27.27 324.79 
ABC 8.40 52.98 45.45 541.32 
Subpanel C: DV = job_top_20pct 
A 19.85 26.60 23.08 116.27 
B 19.85 35.23 30.77 155.03 
C 19.85 51.18 46.15 232.54 
ABC 19.85 41.26 34.62 174.41 
Subpanel D: DV = job_top_30pct 
A 29.77 54.03 58.97 198.09 
B 29.77 47.79 46.15 155.03 
C 29.77 56.41 56.41 189.48 
ABC 29.77 68.97 64.10 215.32 
 
Notes: These tables report the out -of-sample prediction performance of the Initial Placement Model, which 
predicts whether a candidate’s initial placement institution falls within the top K percent of the cohort in the same 
year. Panel A reports results for test year 2017, and Panel B reports results for test year 2018. Predictor sets A, B, 
and C and the ensemble model ABC are defined as in Table 3. Mean DV is the unconditional mean of the 
dependent variable in the test sample. NDCG@K, Precision@K, and LIFT are defined in Appendix C. 
 